The trade union organization is the second-largest trade union center in the Czech Republic. Together with X, it represents the unions in the Council for Economic and Social Agreement. This trade union center was founded in July 1995 by X, X, and X. Over the years, other trade unions have joined the center, including X, X, and X. The trade union organization also cooperates with some independent trade unions and local organizations. The trade unions affiliated with the trade union organization are politically independent, free, and have their own identity, representing approximately 200,000 members. Some unions have regional offices. The mission of the trade union organization is primarily to: defend and protect the economic, labor, and social interests of the members of the confederation, which are the individual trade unions affiliated with it; advocate for the demands of the members of the confederation in relation to the state, employer associations, and other entities; develop cooperation with partner foreign trade union centers, industry-wide trade union organizations, and other international institutions; coordinate and defend the interests of the members of the confederation at the national and regional levels. The trade union organization operates based on the following principles: independence from state authorities, administration, and local government, from employer organizations, political parties and movements, and other trade union and civic associations; democratic principles of negotiation and decision-making; uniting interests and fostering inter-union and international solidarity; respecting and supporting common goals. The trade union organization has the authority to negotiate with the highest representatives of the state, including the president, parliament, government, and other state authorities, with national employer organizations, to conclude general agreements with social partners and the government, to represent the members of the confederation in joint bodies of social partners and the government at the highest level (tripartism), and to represent the members of the association in international industry-wide organizations. Its activities focus primarily on the development and implementation of social policy, employment policy, insurance systems for pension security, tax regulations, and the principles of operation of non-profit organizations, as well as participation in the legislative process, which is the right of trade unions in the Czech Republic, just like employer organizations, by law. Other powers of the trade union organization extend to the areas of occupational safety and health, labor and environmental protection, promoting equal treatment, and developing public services. The trade union organization coordinates joint activities of the members of the confederation in the areas of collective bargaining, regional policy, etc. It provides legal assistance and advice in agreed areas, trade union education, a trade union information system, promotion, public opinion research, and the preparation of expert analyses and forecasts. The individual trade unions have essentially the same mission, which they implement at the level of company trade union organizations and at the industry level. One of their main tasks is collective bargaining. Trade unions devote maximum attention to collective bargaining, whether it is through providing methodological assistance to trade union organizations, direct participation in collective bargaining, educational activities in this area, etc. Trade unions operate nationwide and negotiate industry-wide collective agreements with employer organizations in the business sector. As for other trade union structures, company trade union organizations operate at the company level. With the privatization of the service sector, trade union organizations began to emerge, uniting employees of different employers (companies) in one location, known as local trade union organizations, but currently, their number is minimal, and trade union organizations operating within a single employer clearly predominate.