**Shaping the Future of Labor: A Report on the Union's Activities, 2018-2021**

**Preface**

The past four years have been a period of significant change for the union. The COVID-19 pandemic has profoundly altered our daily lives and presented unprecedented challenges to our economy. The pandemic has highlighted the importance of social cohesion, comprehensive social services, and a capable government. We have all experienced firsthand the value of solidarity and that this crisis can only be overcome together. The union has responded quickly, prioritizing the health and safety of workers, shaping the future of the union, and playing a key role in workplace safety and health. We have achieved increased and extended short-time work benefits, and we have initiated a broad debate in our country about the importance of work and its value to society. We have ensured that parents who stayed home during the homeschooling period to care for their children did not suffer significant financial or professional disadvantages, and we have demonstrated during the crisis that gender equality is a central element of our union's work. We have consistently emphasized to policymakers that our model of co-determination, collective bargaining, and a strong union is a reliable anchor for people in our country, especially during times of crisis.

Addressing the pandemic and its economic and social consequences has required significant effort. Nevertheless, the epochal transformations of the socio-ecological transition have been at the forefront of the union's work over the past four years. The union and its affiliated organizations have developed clear positions for a just and socially responsible approach to the climate transition and the digital transformation, and have successfully integrated these positions into the political process at the federal, state, local, and European levels. Co-determination and collective bargaining are also key tools for shaping this transformation in the interests of employees. For example, it is essential to involve works councils and employee representatives more strongly in issues related to training and development. The modernization of works councils, which we have championed, can only be a first step. We must shape the socio-ecological transformation in a way that preserves our natural resources while promoting prosperity and strong democratic participation rights for employees. For this reason, we will continue to strengthen dual vocational training, which is a successful model for both employees and the economy. Through the amendment of the Vocational Training Act and the parliamentary inquiry commission on "Vocational Education in the Digital Age of Work," we have made dual vocational training fit for the future. We will not allow employers to abuse the profound changes within the union as an excuse to undermine workers' rights. The most effective way to prevent this is through strong collective bargaining agreements and increased co-determination. These two issues were at the top of the agenda of our union's campaign for the federal election. And we were successful: in the coalition agreement of the "traffic light" government, the federal government has pledged to strengthen collective bargaining and co-determination.

With the "Union-Union" initiative, we took a bold step. We called on people across the country to participate in the debate about shaping their own working and living environments. This allowed us to engage in dialogue, initiate conversations, and learn more about the immediate problems faced by people, from housing shortages to precarious employment and the security of pensions. We also learned that, despite the diversity of interests, most people envision a good future, solidarity, and social cohesion. However, the "Union-Union" initiative was not only an outward-facing participatory process; by involving regional unions and union organizations, we also achieved internal organizational strengthening. Our regional volunteer work within the district and union organizations contributed to this success. We want to continue on this path. In addition, we have further developed successful target group formats such as the Equal Pay Day and the Union Day. It is a great success for the union that gender equality issues are no longer marginal topics but are an integral part of the political debate. Our efforts and political pressure have also paid off in the area of public investment.

The union has been able to emphasize, not least through the work of the IMK (Institute for Macroeconomic Research), that more investment is needed in modern infrastructure, the expansion of renewable energies, digitalization, education, and ambitious technology promotion. The European Union has also experienced turbulent times in recent years. The United Kingdom has withdrawn, and right-wing populist leaders in Poland and Hungary have undermined fundamental European values. At the same time, a new Commission President, Ursula von der Leyen, has launched a transformative program of unprecedented scale with the "Green Deal," with which Europe aims to become a leader in sustainable transformation. We, the union, are fighting to make the European continent a project of progress once again. That is why we have made it clear that there will be no "Green Deal" without a "Social Deal" for the union in Germany and Europe. Together with the X (likely another organization), we have made a significant contribution to the implementation of the minimum wage directive. Our efforts to secure more rights for workers in the digital platform economy are yielding results. Together with the X, we have ensured that co-determination and democracy at the workplace have a significantly higher profile. Moreover, there is now a growing recognition within the European Commission of the need to take the interests of workers into much greater account. We will not allow the European integration project to be hijacked by those who only understand it as a means of creating a highly liberalized internal market or who advocate for the construction of a fortress Europe. Our colleagues at "Gewerkschaft" (union) see every day how important it is to advocate for fair and equitable labor mobility. They advise and support workers in the meat industry, agriculture, international road transport, and courier and delivery services. Many of the challenges and successes described here are detailed in the following annual report. They also show the paths that the union and its member unions want to continue pursuing in the next four years. Best regards! Reiner Hoffmann, Chairman of the Union.

[Table of Contents]

2 Foreword
7 Board Members
10 Reiner Hoffmann
12 Elke Hannack
14 Stefan Körzell
16 Annelie Buntenbach
18 Anja Piel
22 A. The Union: The Flagship Project of the Union
30 B. Achievements of the Union as a Federation of Unions
34 C. Democracy and Social Cohesion
34 Elections/Right-wing extremism/Corona deniers
38 Gender Equality
45 Equal Treatment of LGBTQIAAP+
46 National and European Refugee Policy
48 Peace Policy
49 Union Historical Policy
50 Media and Cultural Policy
56 D. The Future of Work
56 Collective Bargaining, Co-determination, and Workers' Rights
61 Remote Work and Digitalization of the Union
64 Abuse of Temporary Contracts and Agency Work/Mini-jobs, Unjustified Fixed-term Contracts
68 Union
71 Occupational Safety and Health
73 Union
78 E. Education and Training
78 Schools/Education Policy
80 Vocational Training and Further Education
84 Democratic and Social Higher Education
88 F. Social Security and the Labor Market
88 Labor Market Policy and Short-time Work
93 Labor and Social Law
103 Pension Policy
104 Care Policy
106 Health Policy and the Healthcare Industry
108 Senior Citizens' Policy
112 G. The Economy in Transition
112 Economic Situation and Employment Trends
113 Sustainability Policy/Energy Transition/Union Transformation
117 Industry, Services, and Crafts Policy
121 Structural and Regional Policy
126 H. A Strong and Effective State
126 Future Investments
129 Tax Policy and Inequality
131 Public Procurement
132 Housing and Consumer Policy
134 Public Service
140 I. Union Policy
148 J. European and International Union Work
148 Economic Stimulus Programs (Recovery, Green Deal)
149 Humane and Sustainable Supply Chains
150 European Labor Market and Social Policy/Social Europe
158 K. Union Internal Affairs
158 Organizational Policy
161 Digital Formats in Times of Corona
164 Communication/Intranet/Action Platform
164 Union Representation
166 Ruhrfestspiele (Ruhr Festival)
167 Union Education Center

174 Legal Department/Legal Services/Data Protection 174 Personnel Policy 183 Appendix 184 Trade Union within the Trade Union 186 Membership Development in the Trade Union 2018-2021 188 List of Abbreviations 189 Links to Statements to the Legislature Board Members © Trade Union/Gordon Welters Reiner Hoffmann, Chairman of the Trade Union Business Areas: Fundamental Issues and Social Policy / Co-determination / Media and Cultural Policy / International and European Trade Union Policy / Personnel / Communication and Public Relations / Trade Union Secretariat / Liaison Offices, Europe and Federal Level / Legal Department. Born May 30, 1955, in Wuppertal, North Rhine-Westphalia. Widower, two children. Elementary school, Commercial school, Wholesale and foreign trade merchant at Hoechst AG, Advanced vocational school for economics, Civilian service at the Wuppertal Clinic, University of Gesamthochschule Wuppertal, degree in economics, Assistant at the Economic and Social Committee (WSA) of the European Community, Brussels, Research associate at the Department of Economics, University of Gesamthochschule Wuppertal, Employee of Gewerkschaft-Böckl Gewerkschaft, Düsseldorf, most recently as Head of the Research Funding Department, Director of the European Trade Union Institute (ETUI), Brussels, Deputy General Secretary of the X Regional Branch, Chairman of the North Rhine-Westphalia branch of the Mining, Chemicals and Energy Trade Union, Elected as a member of the Trade Union, Elected as Chairman of the Trade Union at the 20th Trade Union Congress. Selected Mandates: Chairman of the Board of Gewerkschaft-Böckl Gewerkschaft, Executive Board of the International Trade Union Confederation, Executive Board of X, ZDF Television Council, Administrative Board of the KfW Bankengruppe (German Development Bank), Member of the European Economic and Social Committee (EESC). 10 Board Members © Trade Union/ Detlef Eden Board Members 1112 Elke Hannack, Deputy Chairwoman of the Trade Union Business Areas: Public Service and Civil Servants' Policy / Trade Union, Equality and Family Policy / Trade Union and Trade Union Policy / Education Policy and Educational Work / Digitalization, Organization and IT / Event, Building and Travel Management / Trade Union Education Center. Born September 23, 1961, in Gladbeck, North Rhine-Westphalia. Abitur (high school diploma) at the Anne-Frank-Gymnasium, Werne an der Lippe, Studies in Protestant Theology at the Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität Münster, Packer and saleswoman, AK Kaufpark Werne a. d. Lippe, Chairwoman of the Works Council / Chairwoman of the General Works Council, Member of the Trade Union, Member of the large collective bargaining commission of the Trade Union for Retail, Banks and Insurance (HBV), Member of the HBV Regional Board North Rhine-Westphalia, Saleswoman, AK Kaufpark Werne an der Lippe, Training as an organizational secretary at the Trade Union in Offenbach and Bonn, Organizational secretary at the Trade Union district of Bonn / Rhein-Sieg, Training as a Trade Union legal protection secretary in Bad Kreuznach, Legal protection secretary at the Trade Union, District Chairwoman of the Trade Union district of Oberberg / Rhein-Berg, Head of the Trade Union office in Gummersbach, Deputy Chairwoman of the Trade Union regional branch of North Rhine-Westphalia, Member of X-Trade Union, Deputy Chairwoman of the Trade Union. Selected Mandates: President of the Federal Working Group "Work and Life", Board of the Kuratorium of the Gewerkschaft-Böckl Gewerkschaft, Advisory Board of the Federal Anti-Discrimination Agency, Executive Board of the International Trade Union Confederation, Alternating Chairwoman of the Executive Committee of the Federal Institute for Vocational Education (BiBB). Board Members © Trade Union/Simone M.

Neumann, Board Members
1314
Stefan Körzell
Member of the Gewerkschaft (union)
Areas of Responsibility:
Economic, financial, and tax policy, minimum wage / collective bargaining policy, collective bargaining group for temporary work / housing and consumer policy / structural, service, and transportation policy / environmental and energy policy / crafts policy / union finances / asset management and fiduciary company of the union / Ruhrfestspiele
Born on January 18, 1963, in Wildeck-Bosserode, Hesse; lives in Bad Hersfeld.
Education: Trained as a mechanical fitter at Rotenburger Metallwerke (RMW) in Rotenburg / Fulda.
Since 1980, member of the X.
1984-1985: Civilian service at the Fürsteneck Folk High School.
1980-1990: Rotenburger Metallwerke, union representative, works council.
1982-1990: Chairman of the union district committee for the Hersfeld-Rotenburg district.
Member of the local council of the X administrative office in Bebra.
1990-1991: Organizational secretary of the X union district in Fulda.
1991-2002: Organizational secretary of the X union district in Hersfeld-Rotenburg.
1997-2002: Chairman of the X union district in Bad Hersfeld and Eschwege.
2001-2002: Acting chairman of the X union district in Waldeck-Schwalm-Eder and Kassel.
2002-2014: Chairman of the X union regional association for Hesse-Thuringia.
Since 2014: Member of the executive board of the X union.
Selected Mandates:
Member of the board of the X-Böckl union.
Member of the minimum wage commission.
Member of the Trade Union Advisory Committee (TUAC).
Member of the administrative board of the KfW (German Development Bank).
Member of the ACE (Automobile Club Europe).
Member of the board of the DIW (German Institute for Economic Research).
Board Members
1516
Annelie Buntenbach
Member of the Gewerkschaft (union) (2006-2020)
Areas of Responsibility:
Labor market policy / social policy / law / migration and anti-racism policy / fight against right-wing extremism / project "Future of Work" / union / union protection / union project "Union".
Born on February 24, 1955; married; lives in Bielefeld.
Studies in history and philosophy in Bielefeld.
Training to become a teacher (second state examination).
Worked for several years as a typesetter, engaged in political education on the topic of right-wing extremism.
Union member.
Member of Bündnis 90/Die Grünen (Green Party).
Member of the German Bundestag (Bündnis 90/Die Grünen),
Labor market policy spokesperson, member of the Committee for Labor and Social Affairs, head of the union commission of the Bündnis 90/Die Grünen parliamentary group, responsible for the issue of right-wing extremism.
Bündnis 90/Die Grünen representative in the parliamentary inquiry committee on globalization.
Head of the social policy department at the X union.
Member of the Gewerkschaft (union).
Selected Mandates:
Alternate chairwoman of the administrative board of the Federal Employment Agency.
Alternate chairwoman of the union of the German Pension Insurance Fund.
Member of the social advisory board of the Federal Government.
Executive member of the X.
Board Members
17
Anja Piel
Member of the Gewerkschaft (union) (since 2020)
Areas of Responsibility:
Labor market policy / social policy / law / migration and anti-racism policy / union project "Union" / fight against right-wing extremism / union protection.
Born on November 3, 1965; married; lives in Fischbeck.
Abitur (high school diploma).
Training as an industrial management assistant in Bad Schwartau.
Joined IG Chemie Papier und Keramik (chemical, paper, and ceramics union).
Established a mothers' center in Hameln and worked as a freelance journalist for the Deister- und Weserzeitung newspaper.
Managing director of Bündnis 90/Die Grünen, Hameln city council group.
Chairwoman of Bündnis 90/Die Grünen, Lower Saxony state association.
Member of the Lower Saxony state parliament and parliamentary group leader of Bündnis 90/Die Grünen.
Joined the Vereinte Dienstleistungsgewerkschaft X (United Service Workers' Union).
Member of the Gewerkschaft (union).
Selected Mandates:
Alternate chairwoman of the administrative board of the Federal Employment Agency.
Alternate chairwoman of the union of the German Pension Insurance Fund.
Member of the social advisory board of the Federal Government.
Executive member of the X.
13
Board Members
19
A. The Union: The Flagship Project of the Union
22
A. The Union: The Flagship Project of the Union
With the union, it has been possible to engage in constructive dialogue with citizens and colleagues. The focus has been on their expectations for a climate-neutral, gender-equal transformation of the economy, a modern welfare state, and a strong democracy.

This three-year process yielded two key insights: firstly, that opportunities for direct participation are desired and utilized. Thousands of people invested their time to advocate for their interests, participating in union activities and discussion events, or contributing ideas digitally and in person. The second insight emerged from the analysis of these contributions. The expectations expressed aligned with many of the union's goals. Our positions resonated with society, allowing us to advocate for policies that benefit workers with greater strength. The results also provided deeper insights into the prevailing notions of solidarity in society. Our analysis identified three perspectives, which, while distinct, have the potential for conflict: The first perspective emphasizes a strong state and a functioning social partnership. Solidarity is defined within national borders (the concept of solidarity within a strong "us"). Another perspective focuses on nature and the environment as the foundation of life. This emphasizes global awareness and international cooperation. Awareness of the consequences of our lifestyles and our economic system (fossil fuels) is crucial for international solidarity with people and nature, and for global justice through greater equality (solidarity in transformation). A third perspective places the individual at the center of society, where solidarity is primarily experienced in close-knit, neighborhood, or workplace settings. This perspective suggests that greater things can emerge from this (solidarity in small-scale interactions). Throughout the process, the union demonstrated a commitment to communication, participation, and solidarity, remaining open to all who wished to participate democratically and actively shape their lives and working conditions. This ensured broad societal engagement. The union pioneered new approaches, opening itself to its members by listening, gathering ideas, and discussing them. The promise to participants was that their involvement in the future dialogue would have an impact, and that the process would be transparently communicated. This commitment was fulfilled with a kickoff event in November 2018 in Berlin, attended by approximately 450 employees and volunteers from across Germany. Photo: Union/Simone M. Neumann. The Union: A flagship project of the Union. In January 2020, around 100 union members met for the union conference in Weimar. Photo: Union/Gerngross Glowinski. The union and its members were aware of this requirement and fulfilled it by providing regular updates, progress reports, and opportunities for discussion and comments on the digital dialogue platform "redenwirueber.de." As a listener in an open and participatory dialogue, the union responded to the expectations and ideas of the participants, and reviewed its own work in light of new perspectives. Events at the national level, such as the union policy conference and the regional conferences in 2020, the livestream for May 1, 2020, the digital union conference in 2020, and the political talk show during the union's federal election campaign in 2021, focused on discussing ideas generated within the union. They provided space for colleagues and politicians to express their positions. The union thus served as a bridge between political demands and the ideas of people as citizens in their local communities and as employees in businesses and government. The union offered an unconventional format for engagement and participation. Its two guiding questions, "How do we want to work?" and "How do we want to live?" connected the realities of the workplace and daily life. The direct engagement with people, primarily through questions, was a new mechanism that, along with a unique visual identity, created a different kind of public perception. This was evident in social media and through physical dialogue cards and boxes. The union facilitated a dual participation process.

The initiative was designed to be outward-facing, encouraging dialogue with the public, and inward-facing, involving the union and its members. A key event was the launch in November 2018, which brought together representatives from the district and local unions, the union federation, and the managing union. Around 350 volunteers form the local political representation of the union and give the union a local presence – in people's everyday lives. They are supported by the 59 regional offices of the union. "Affordable housing means half the rent" – this slogan was used by the union in a nationwide campaign against excessive rents, as it did here in Aachen. Photo: Union. Based on the experiences and needs of the various levels of the union, particularly the district and local unions, the themes for the future dialogue were developed together. This bottom-up approach strengthened the union's work at the local level. It also motivated and supported committed union members to actively participate in the process, particularly on issues of equality. Local unions were able to demonstrate their commitment and show that they take people's concerns seriously and are working towards practical solutions. For a focus and improved coordination of joint actions across the country, the union worked with four key themes and achieved significant media attention and political impact. Direct communication and coordinated actions brought the central and local levels of the union closer together. Central campaigns and local events significantly strengthened the ability of local unions to take action. And it became clear that the central, political demands of the union were rooted in local realities. After the launch in 2018, hundreds of colleagues from all over the union met again at the digital union conference in 2021 to discuss previous successes and future steps. Within the union's administration, the various threads were brought together. Model templates for participatory dialogue events and communication materials were prepared and made available for decentralized, modular use. This not only consolidated internal resources but also motivated more volunteers to take on their own projects. Due to the pandemic, activities were focused on digital platforms from March 2020. This allowed us to gain new knowledge in online communication and introduce new tools and ways of working. More thematic templates for social media were prepared centrally, which local unions then used for their own channels. This allowed local colleagues to be relieved of some tasks while also spreading messages more widely. The union is thus visible as a social and political actor at the local level and is entering into partnerships with local government and civil society organizations. The successful projects show people that no one has to do everything alone. Even if other actors have different starting points or approaches, the union asks: How can we work together? The goal is to learn to work together to find fair and social solutions to the problems of our time. The union not only made its values and goals more widely known and brought them into the public discourse. The union also demonstrated its competence and willingness to engage in issues such as housing policy. This was achieved through its own studies, including those on distortions in the local housing market, such as those conducted by the Hildesheim district union in collaboration with the local tenants' association and through its own initiatives, such as the establishment of a state housing corporation in Lower Saxony to promote affordable housing. Together with Caritas and other initiatives, the union in Lower Saxony advocated for the establishment of this corporation.

[Images: Social media graphics for the union's future dialogue, featuring slogans like "Continuing as before? If home office is not an option," and "We are talking about... The union's future dialogue."]

The union: A flagship project of the union.
Neighbor: We are talking about...
The union's future dialogue.
Continuing as before? If home office is not an option:
We are talking about...
The union's future dialogue.
Let's talk about...
The union: The lighthouse project of the union.

For them, it was clear that actively addressing grievances and offering appropriate solutions could effectively resolve such issues in the long term. Olaf Lies, the Minister for Economy, Labor, and Transport in Lower Saxony, supports the union's commitment. This example demonstrates the role of the union as a mediator between citizens and policymakers. In Baden-Württemberg, specifically in the city of Karlsruhe, similar progress was made. The Karlsruhe Trade Union Association successfully advocated for the city to refrain from using temporary employment agencies. The political demands were developed in collaboration with works councils and employee representatives in the region. This was followed by public awareness campaigns, such as a bicycle demonstration with 200 participants passing by "exemplary companies" with collective bargaining agreements, and extensive public relations efforts. Ultimately, a common position was found with the political factions in the municipal council and local voter associations, and an inter-factional motion with the union's key objectives was adopted. The use of temporary employment agencies is now only permitted in the city of Karlsruhe and its municipal enterprises with the approval of the entire employee council. The "Queer in Niederbayern" association, supported by the Lower Bavaria regional union and the Dingolfing-Gewerkschaft union, is a shining example of new alliances and greater social cohesion within the union. Union members are also actively involved in the association. A study by the parliamentary group of the Green Party showed that people who identify as LGBTQ+ face particular challenges in rural areas. Often, young people have only two options: to live in hiding or to move to a large city. The initiative aims to break this pattern by providing a platform for visibility and advocating for the rights of LGBTQ+ individuals. The first Christopher Street Day (CSD) in Lower Bavaria in September 2019 was organized by "Queer in Niederbayern." Marlene Schönberger, a union member and chairwoman, was a founding member. (Photo: Union/Thomas Range). This project has inspired similar initiatives, and in 2021, four more CSD events took place in various cities. There, the association, together with the union, raised awareness against hate, violence, and discrimination. These three successful regional initiatives exemplify a long list of other positive examples. The insights gained from the desired working and living environments of union members were not lost. The contributions from union members were reviewed for new perspectives on union work and influenced discussions leading up to the 22nd union conference. While there is broad agreement on the need for a socio-ecological transformation of the economy and a desire for greater social cohesion, not all of the approximately 5,000 union members can share the views and demands of the union and its member unions, and not all can be accommodated. There are other perspectives and different goals, even among the participants in the dialogue. This makes the results of the future dialogue all the more valuable. The core message of the union remains: those who get involved and advocate for their interests strengthen democracy.

B. Successes of the union as a federation of unions.
The union achieved the following during the reporting period:
* It successfully secured the livelihoods of employees during the COVID-19 crisis. Access to short-time work benefits was simplified and expanded. Short-time work benefits were increased to up to 80 or 87 percent, and the regulations were extended until 2022. In addition, it was possible to temporarily exempt employers from taxes on increased short-time work benefits, extend the tax-free status of the Corona bonus, and implement a home office allowance of up to 600 euros as a deductible expense.
* The duration of unemployment benefits was repeatedly extended during the COVID-19 crisis. In addition, access to basic income support (Hartz IV) was made easier with a temporary suspension of asset verification and the assumption of actual housing costs.
* The entitlement to parental leave benefits was significantly expanded during the COVID-19 crisis.

For each year and child, the number of workdays provided to each parent was increased from 10 to 30 in 2021 and 2022, and to 60 workdays for single parents. This benefit could be claimed not only when a child was ill, but also when childcare services were disrupted due to the pandemic. ...In the meat processing industry, temporary work contracts were prohibited, and the use of temporary workers was significantly restricted. This is a major success, both for the affected employees and for the future reduction of precarious employment practices in other industries. The law on work safety inspections is currently being evaluated. The Federal Constitutional Court still has to rule on constitutional complaints against the law. ...The long-awaited equalization of wages between East and West Germany has finally been implemented. Overall, the approximately 750,000 employees in temporary work received annual wage increases of between 1.9 and 4.9 percent through the collective bargaining agreement during the reporting period. For the first time, a benefit for union members was included in the industry's collective bargaining negotiations. ...The law modernizing works councils improved the protection of those who initiate elections and aims to classify obstruction of works councils as an official offense. ...A good pension means that if the salary is sufficient, the pension should also be sufficient. Stabilizing the pension level until 2025 ensures a good pension. The new basic pension helps those with low salaries. Now, both need to be improved. ...Strengthening collective bargaining agreements and wage negotiations, and ensuring that the minimum wage is sufficient to prevent poverty, must be considered a necessity in politics and society. Political parties and ministries are launching initiatives to strengthen wage negotiations, and the statutory minimum wage is to be increased to 12 euros. ...The "Work of Tomorrow" law significantly expands vocational training and further education, and incorporates key demands of the unions, including higher subsidies for participation in decision-making processes and additional incentives for further education during short-time work. The union's "Union of Unions" has introduced a benefit for employees in companies with 45 or more employees. As part of the reform, it was also possible to reverse the burden of proof for part-time employees seeking to increase their working hours, and to secure the right for employees who want to change their working hours to have their say. ...There has been progress in the economic policy debates regarding necessary investments and their financing through a reform of the debt brake. This has also brought investments in affordable housing into the public eye. ...Within the framework of the structural change commission and the subsequent legislative process, a socially compatible phase-out of coal is being promoted. In addition to protecting jobs, new perspectives are being created for the regions. Furthermore, the phase-out of coal is linked to progress in the energy transition. ...The union's "Good Work by Design" approach to shaping artificial intelligence (AI) has become established at the national and international levels. As a first step, the application area of AI has been included in the law on works councils. With the draft guidelines to improve the working conditions of platform workers, the EU Commission has presented an important instrument to strengthen the rights of platform workers and their representatives. ...Many trainees are benefiting from the improved vocational training law, which introduced a minimum training allowance. The union's "Union of Unions" has raised awareness in society and politics about the numerous violations of the rights of employees in the public and privatized sectors since the beginning of 2020, and improvements have been initiated for this group of people. ...Human rights and union rights will be better protected along global value chains in the future through the Supply Chain Due Diligence Act. This has also strengthened the rights of works councils to participate in human rights risk management. ...16 professions have been brought back under the master craftsman obligation through the 4th and 5th amendments to the Crafts Code (HwO), and for the first time, the union has the right to propose examiners in the HwO. ...The results and demands from the union's training report, especially the special edition "Corona Training Study," have been debated in the public. ...The union's advisory services, provided by Gewerkschaft and Gewerkschaft, have been continuously expanded.

...with the successful conclusion of negotiations in the "Standard-Setting Committee on Violence and Harassment against Men and Trade Unions within the Trade Union" (ILO Convention 190), the first globally binding minimum standards for the definition of violence and sexual harassment in the workplace were established.

31
C. Democracy and Social Cohesion
Elections [Right-wing extremism [Corona deniers
Elections
During the reporting period, new parliaments were elected in twelve federal states, at the federal level, and in the European Union, followed by the formation of new government coalitions. Since 2017, the balance of power between parties has shifted: the traditional parties CDU, CSU, and SPD lost significant support in many elections, while other parties gained substantial or moderate support. Consequently, the political landscape in the 16 federal states was diverse, with a total of 16 different configurations, and in several federal states, 3-party coalitions had to be formed to achieve a majority. The composition of the electorate also changed in terms of age, gender, education, economic situation and occupation, and place of residence. It was observed that more voters were choosing a party not out of conviction, but out of disappointment, and that voting decisions were often made very late. The federal government and politics as a whole faced a significant problem of declining public trust: at the beginning of 2019, only about 10 percent of people believed that parties and governments kept their promises. This was later mitigated, as many citizens initially welcomed the federal government's handling of the Corona crisis. It should be noted that during the reporting period, the 16-year tenure of Chancellor Dr. Angela Merkel ended, and a three-party coalition ("traffic light") consisting of the SPD, the Greens, and the FDP was formed at the federal level, led by the new Chancellor Olaf Scholz.

Right-wing extremism
During the reporting period, the "Alternative for Germany" (AfD) was unable to increase its support in elections, but remained represented in all parliaments (German Bundestag, state parliaments, European Parliament) and also in many local councils. Their trade union was able to further solidify its position in the second legislative period. They have mandates, employees, usually have a parliamentary group, receive funding for election campaigns, and will soon have a right-wing think tank funded by taxpayers through the Desiderius-Erasmus trade union. The warnings from academia that the AfD and other actors on the extreme right would pose a long-term challenge to society have been confirmed. During the reporting period, the AfD has moved further to the right. While parts of the party already had clear connections to the extreme right, including the Identitarian movement, Corona conspiracy theorists, and militant neo-Nazis, it can now be assumed that the former "faction," whose public dissolution was announced to avoid the entire party being monitored by the Federal Office for the Protection of the Constitution, is pulling the strings and its influence within the party is growing. The AfD has thus become, to a large extent, a party of the extreme right. Over its nine years of existence, the AfD has become increasingly radical and claims to be the only true representative of the interests of the German people. After entering the German Bundestag with an initial 92 members, the parliamentary group primarily sought to gain greater public attention through insults, defamation, deliberate taboos, or staged excerpts from plenary sessions. Although the focus of legislative proposals, motions, and inquiries was often on migration and refugee policy, the parliamentary group - in accordance with its strategy - sought to cater to certain groups of voters on the one hand, and to discredit civil society organizations, including the trade union, as opponents of democracy, and to portray itself as a victim on the other hand. The AfD's strategy became clear, for example, in the inquiries regarding the federal program "Democracy in Action." The parliamentary group questioned whether the promotion of a brochure presented in the diversity media library of the Information and Documentation Center for Antiracism Work (IDA) e.V. was legitimate and "legally permissible." The works council elections were also the subject of an inquiry.

Here, the faction wanted to know if the federal government was aware of any instances where "right-wing and far-right individuals" had obstructed the election of works councils. The AfD also increasingly targeted political education programs and schools in the federal states. In particular, teachers who advocate for democracy and against racism were targeted. In several federal states, the AfD set up online platforms and called for teachers who expressed political opinions to be reported. The Thuringian AfD faction initially attempted to gain influence over social policy issues within the party and to present itself as the advocate of the "common people" with a view to the state elections in eastern Germany. An AfD party conference focused on social policy was postponed several times. When it finally took place, it focused more on other issues than on democracy and social cohesion, and did not present a comprehensive social policy program. Within the party, there was a contradiction between the attempt to present itself as a "workers' party for Germans" and the position of leaving the market to its own devices, which could not be resolved. Accordingly, the AfD's program for the 2021 federal election contained many gaps. The AfD's actions clearly demonstrate the need for a continuous engagement with the strategies of far-right and far-right populist groups and parties, and highlight the need to exchange experiences and insights between the unions. During the reporting period, the union consistently fulfilled this task through various formats (publications, expert discussions, a working group within the union, briefings with researchers, roundtables with unions, monthly reports, and election analyses). The union and its member organizations had a constant and high need for this exchange, networking, and advice. So-called worker organizations within the AfD and attempts to create an "alternative to the union" proved to be empty promises. These organizations no longer play a significant role today. Nevertheless, attention was also paid to the works council elections and the situation in companies and workplaces. In particular, activities of the far-right movement "l percent" and "X" were observed, which attempted to confront the union and its member organizations directly with new media formats. However, they were unable to gain significant influence in the companies. The militant neo-Nazi scene became a much-discussed topic. The attacks and murders committed by the far right during the reporting period – including the assassination of Kassel's regional president, Dr. Walter Lübcke, and the right-wing terrorist attacks in Halle and Hanau – were a reason for establishing a cabinet committee of the federal government to combat right-wing extremism and racism, which the union closely supported and in whose deliberations the union's demands were reflected. A notable success was the inclusion of the "union" area in the adopted catalog of measures. It was important for the union to inform its own multipliers about developments, to strengthen their ability to react and act, and to discuss strategies with them. Therefore, the further training of union employees was given priority. Appropriate training courses with very good participation took place in the union and its member organizations. As early as 2017, the union, together with its member organization, developed seminar offers for the union. In the companies, corresponding offers were made through the SEDA project (sensitization, democratization, and diversity in the union) and seminars were conducted. The project, which was funded by the Federal Ministry for Family Affairs and was limited until the end of 2019, aimed to strengthen a democratic corporate culture through training and support. It was subsequently continued through two initiatives: the "DIAS - Strengthening Democracy in the Union" project, which is managed by the union and funded by the Federal Agency for Civic Education, and the joint project of the union and its member organization "Networking, Education, and Support," which operates without public funds and aims to provide in-depth training, networking, and assistance in the event of attacks on union employees and officials. Both projects have been extremely successful and, at the time of this report, are scheduled to continue until mid-2022.

Projects to Strengthen Democracy
In the summer of 2020, the union submitted a comprehensive written statement to the Federal Government's Cabinet Committee on Combating Right-Wing Extremism and Racism. During an oral hearing at the level of state secretaries, further aspects could be presented. Particular emphasis was placed on the relevance of historical and political education, and the importance of involving the union more in political education and democracy-building initiatives. At the end of the process, it was possible to ensure that the union was included in the Federal Government's package of measures. Subsequently, the Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs launched its own program to promote democracy in the workplace, in which the union, the affiliated union, and union-affiliated training institutions are significantly involved. Within this program, the union has taken on a coordination project called "Our Work - Our Diversity. Initiative for Workplace Democracy Competence," which aims to better connect and support 33 individual projects across the country. In the project "Democracy is not a solo endeavor - Network of providers for political education in the world of work," which the union is conducting together with the union training institute and funded by the Federal Agency for Political Education since 2021, the focus is on outreach political education against the far-right and to strengthen democracy. The project aims to create a scientific inventory of union and union-affiliated outreach political education, and to better connect different educational providers. In addition, new measures are to be developed and tested to reach employees who are currently difficult to access. In 2020, the project "More Democracy Instead of Racism and Discrimination in the Workplace" was also launched, funded by the EU Commission. In this project, which is scientifically supported by the University of Kassel, strategies of right-wing populist parties are being analyzed in six European countries, with the aim of understanding how these parties specifically try to attract workers. In addition, recommendations for action are being developed that unions can use to strengthen democratic awareness among employees and to counter racism and discrimination in the workplace.

Democracy and Social Cohesion
"Corona Deniers"
The COVID-19 pandemic and, in particular, the associated restrictions on public life, led to dissatisfaction among many citizens throughout 2020, which was often expressed in demonstrations where protective and hygiene measures were often consciously ignored. A diverse group of people took to the streets, some criticizing certain protective measures as disproportionate, while others denied the existence of the virus altogether. From the beginning, the protests included members of the "Reichsbürger" movement, conspiracy theorists, and organized right-wing extremists. These so-called "lateral thinkers" often spread antisemitic conspiracy theories, refused to comply with protective measures, downplayed the health risks for particularly vulnerable groups, and ignored the thousands of deaths caused by the pandemic. Through lies, conspiracy theories, and targeted disinformation, they fueled distrust in parliamentary democracy. To counter the disregard for democracy by the "lateral thinkers" and, in particular, to highlight the connections between the movement and the organized right wing, the union published a "focus" on the protests against the COVID-19 measures. On the occasion of a demonstration by the "lateral thinking" movement in Berlin in August 2020, at the edge of which right-wing extremists and conspiracy theorists protested on the steps of the Reichstag, the union also issued a statement. In it, it warned that all protesters against the COVID-19 measures should now be aware that their concerns are being exploited by the enemies of democracy.

Civil Society Alliances
Following the murder of a young man at the fringes of a city festival in Chemnitz in August 2018, there were right-wing riots in the city. In response, the alliance "Democracy and Social Cohesion #Unteilbar" was founded, which organized a large demonstration with 250,000 participants in Berlin in October 2018.

The goals of the alliance are to counter the right-wing shift in society and to prevent different social issues from being pitted against each other, such as migration and social security. The union joined the alliance in December 2018 and has participated in all of its activities since then. These include a large demonstration in Dresden shortly before the 2019 state election, a memorial demonstration after the right-wing terrorist attack in Halle in October 2019, a demonstration in Erfurt in February 2020, after the FDP politician Kemmerich was elected as prime minister with the votes of the AfD, the so-called "Band of Solidarity" in several German cities in June 2020, and a large demonstration before the federal election in Berlin in September 2021. During the reporting period, the union was also involved in the "Alliance for Openness, Solidarity, Democracy and the Rule of Law - against Intolerance, Xenophobia and Violence." This alliance, which also includes the Federation of German Employers' Associations, the German Bishops' Conference, the German Culture Council, the German Nature Conservation Ring, the German Olympic Sports Confederation, the Protestant Church in Germany, the Coordination Council of Muslims, and the Central Council of Jews in Germany, was founded in February 2016. In May 2019, the alliance published a call to all citizens to participate in the European elections and to support a democratic and pro-European party with their vote. In November 2020, the alliance addressed the public with an appeal for more solidarity, dialogue, and cohesion during the Corona pandemic. In a joint publication, the alliance partners also drew lessons from the pandemic in December 2021 and outlined how, in their view, a return to a new normal could be achieved after the crisis. During the reporting period, the union was represented in the synod of the Evangelical Church in Germany (EKD) and in the presidency of the German Evangelical Church Congress (DEKT). As in the past, it participated in the DEKT, which takes place every two years. At the Church Conference in Dortmund in 2019, which was held under the motto "What kind of trust," all union members presented their work and positions at the union's joint stand. In addition, the union was able to successfully recruit new members, especially among young church conference attendees. The planned participation in the DEKT in Frankfurt am Main in 2021 was not realized due to the Corona pandemic, as all events were held exclusively online.

Gender Equality
Gender Equality Policy in the Pandemic
The union members were particularly affected by the pandemic: through challenging work in essential occupations, through the multiple burden of care work at home, and through the loss of income associated with short-time work, unemployment, and unpaid leave. The union members, in particular, are bearing the brunt of this pressure. With the campaign "WE STAND FOR EQUALITY: EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES OUT OF THE CRISIS!", the union put the gender perspective at the forefront. This provided concise information, stimulated discussions, and sharpened the focus on gender-specific inequalities, even during the crisis. During the pandemic, parents with children of primary school age faced enormous challenges. The same was true for working people who were responsible for caring for relatives. For both groups, important care services were cut. The union called for a family emergency aid program for parents and caregivers, in addition to the compensation for loss of earnings under Section 56 of the Infection Protection Act (IfSG), to ensure that employees affected by the closure of facilities received continued payment of their wages for the duration of the pandemic. According to this proposal, 80 percent of the net loss of earnings should be replaced, a right to leave should be guaranteed, and the benefit should be paid without bureaucratic hurdles. To this end, the union actively promoted this initiative not only through press work but also through an online campaign that highlighted the Corona everyday life of many households.

Equal Participation in the Labor Market
International Workers' Day
Every year, on International Workers' Day, the union gives its demands a voice to company and political decision-makers.

The union actively promotes its positions through public relations activities, events, and press work at the local, regional, national, and union levels. Each year, it issues a call to action, urging people to focus on gender equality in the workplace around International Women's Day (March 8th). The union provides a variety of materials each year, based on a changing theme:

*   2018: "Democracy and Social Cohesion: Let's Change!"
*   2019: "We Stand for a Social Europe: Go Vote!"
*   2020: "Let's Fairly Change: #FairCare #FairGoods #FairSharing. Fair Pay - Only with Collective Bargaining!"
*   2021: "More Union. More Equality. More Than Ever! Let's Value Jobs that Involve Direct Contact with People!"

Two special reports published by the union in 2018 and 2020, titled "The Work with People: What is it Worth to Us? A Study from a Gender Equality Perspective" and "Female, Systemically Important, and Underpaid: Improving the Pay and Working Conditions in Unionized and Systemically Important Professions," enriched the debate on improving working conditions and promoting gender equality. The union intensified its lobbying efforts to secure government subsidies for services that support families and create jobs subject to social security contributions. It brought together representatives from academia, the "Mini-Job" central office, and the Federal Ministries of Family Affairs and Social Affairs (BMFSFJ) and Labor and Social Affairs (BMAS). As part of the economic stimulus and investment packages to overcome the pandemic, the union advocated for subsidies for household services to promote family-work balance and create jobs subject to social security contributions.

Together with other unions, the union increased political pressure on the relevant federal ministries, brought the issue onto the political agenda through a series of discussions, integrated it into the work of alliances (e.g., "Fairly Sharing Care Work"), and successfully promoted it through public relations efforts, including a joint statement with the German Home Economics Council in mid-2021.

**Evaluation of the Pay Transparency Act**

The union, as a social partner, was directly involved in the evaluation of the Pay Transparency Act in the spring of 2019 and was asked to provide comments. In almost every area, the criticism already voiced by unions during the legislative process was confirmed: the individual right to information proved to be ineffective, the introduction of a right to collective action remained essential, and only a shift towards mandatory company audits promised success. However, despite the valuable insights gained from the evaluation report and the undeniable need for action, further development of the Pay Transparency Act was not initiated. Nevertheless, the union succeeded in ensuring that several parties explicitly pledged to introduce mandatory audits for companies in the 2021 federal election.

**Equal Pay Day: Close the Gender Pay Gap!**

To increase the pressure on those responsible in politics, the gender pay gap between men and women requires the attention of a broad public. Therefore, the union supported its member unions with materials for Equal Pay Day and, in addition, presented itself as an important player in gender equality through a public relations campaign at the Brandenburg Gate. The date, motto, and campaign changed each year:

*   March 18, 2018: "Let's Melt the Gender Pay Gap!"
*   March 18, 2019: "Right to More!"
*   March 17, 2020: "Whoever Wants to Close the Gender Pay Gap Must Redistribute Work!" (The campaign had to be canceled at short notice due to the pandemic)
*   March 10, 2021: "Let's Eliminate the Gender Pay Gap!"

**Evaluation and Further Development of the Act on Equal Participation in Leadership Positions**

The union and its member unions strongly criticized the practice of many companies, which, despite the provisions of the law on equal participation of men and women in leadership positions in the private and public sectors (Leadership Position Act - FüPoG), set the "target size zero."

[Images: "We're melting the gender pay gap between men and women!", Equal Pay Day 2018. Photo: Union/Fox. "Right to More!", Equal Pay Day 2019.]

Photo: Gewerkschaft/Bors "End the wage gap!" Equal Pay Day 2021. Photo: Gewerkschaft/Freitag Democracy and social cohesion. As evidence of the need for further binding regulations, the union pointed to the smooth functioning of the fixed gender quota of 30 percent on the supervisory boards of over 100 companies that are jointly managed and publicly traded. This need was impressively confirmed by the evaluation of the Act on the Promotion of Equality (FüPoG) 2020. Due to a first draft for a second Act on the Promotion of Equality (FüPoG II) that went beyond the narrow provisions of the coalition agreement, the draft law was repeatedly in jeopardy within a year. The union advocated for a further development of the existing legal regulations, especially for the controversial quota system for union representatives on company boards. Only shortly before the end of the legislative period, the German Bundestag passed the second Act on the Promotion of Equality (FüPoG II), which provides for the introduction of quotas for board members, but falls far short of the union's demands for the private sector. In the Federal Representation Law, the legislature formulated stricter requirements and stipulated in the Federal Equality Law the equal participation of union representatives and men in leadership positions in the federal administration by December 31, 2025. The union accompanied the legislative process with extensive public relations and lobbying efforts, both internally and externally, with factions, ministries, and the Federal Council, as well as with a detailed statement. Digitalization of the union. With regard to the digitalization of the union, the union gave a voice to union and gender equality policy demands through a variety of lectures, discussion contributions, and publications. The union's special study entitled "What does the digitalization of the union mean for union members?" (2017) contributed to gaining knowledge about the situation of female employees in the context of digitalization and, in recent years, has increasingly provided opportunities to present the study results and the union's demands at events or in the press. In the "Democracy and Social Cohesion" section, the union contributed its expertise to the expert committee "Digital Transformation and its impact on the living areas of union members" of the German Trade Union Confederation (2017-2019) and significantly shaped its position paper "Shaping the future: guiding digital transformations in a gender-equitable way" with demands to political decision-makers. With its commitment, the union played a major role in the German government's decision to focus on gender-equitable digitalization in the Third Equality Report, which was published in the summer of 2020. Since the end of 2020, the union has been part of the #SheTransformsIt alliance, which was founded by the digital policy experts of the parliamentary groups of the democratic parties. Directive on work-life balance. One of the consequences of the European Pillar of Social Rights was the European Commission's initiative to promote work-life balance for working parents and caregivers. In April 2019, the union, together with other associations, publicly positioned itself, criticized the weakening of the legislative process for the EU work-life balance directive, and called for a Council decision. After lengthy negotiations, the Council adopted the Commission's proposal on June 13, 2019, with several compromises, and the directive came into force in July 2019. The results of a legal opinion commissioned by the union on the implementation requirements of the work-life balance directive in Germany attracted great attention in the political public and were reflected in the media in 2021. It demonstrates the need for action at the national level: Paternity leave must be introduced independently of previous regulations, and other family-related regulations must be fundamentally adjusted. As a result of the opinion, the union was able to contribute its expertise at a public hearing on paternity leave in the German Bundestag. 4142 The union project "Designing work-life balance!" The union project "Designing work-life balance!", funded by the Federal Ministry for Family Affairs, Senior Citizens, Women and Youth, supports, qualifies, and networks primarily works councils and employee representatives in all industries in their central role as pioneers and co-designers of good work and family-friendly practices in companies and administration.

The project deepens the exchange between the union, the works council, and the staff council, and supports union representatives in their work. Three key formats are used: online and offline publications and public relations, the website, events of various formats, consultations, and coaching. An example is the "12 Tips for Works Councils and Staff Councils: Corona, we can handle this! Solidarity through the crisis," which provides practical guidance for dealing with the challenges of the crisis. During the reporting period, the project reached thousands of participants through over 80 events. In cooperation with all unions, a wide range of topics related to the challenges of achieving a successful work-life balance for employees were discussed and promoted through various events.

12 Tips for Works Councils and Staff Councils: A guide to dealing with the challenges of the crisis.

"What does a woman earn? - Economic independence!"

Since 2014, the union project "What does a woman earn? Economic independence!" (funded by the BMFSFJ) has been providing options for economic independence and promoting the financial security of women. In its fourth phase (2020-2023), the project responded to the desire for more networking within the project community by launching the "Bildet Banden!" (Form a Band!) app. At the launch of the app, the focus was on the 2021 federal election: party platforms were discussed in terms of their gender equality policies, and the importance of union votes in the election was highlighted as a way to encourage politicians.

The union as a gender equality advocate in civil society.

The union welcomed the development of a cross-departmental gender equality strategy, as enshrined in the coalition agreement for the 19th legislative period, and formulated its demands in a position paper. In consultation with the political spokespersons of the parliamentary groups on democracy and social cohesion, and with the BMFSFJ, the union consistently urged the publication and implementation of a cross-departmental gender equality strategy. While the BMFSFJ defined nine goals for gender equality and the necessary measures in early July 2020, the union criticized the lack of enforcement power and sustainability, as there is still no institutionalized procedure, control and sanction mechanisms, central responsibility, or long-term planning.

2021 Federal Election: Equal rights - your choice.

During the 2021 federal election campaign, the union demonstrated its strong commitment to the union's gender equality policies. The guiding principle of all activities was to create the necessary political and workplace conditions for the redistribution of care and work between women and men, as a prerequisite for the financial independence of women. To support this demand, various formats were developed for events, publications, and online communication, including a gender equality online party check. Through a decentralized action day and the livestream "Check the parties! How much equality is in them?", the union has positioned itself as a gender equality advocate, mobilized union members, encouraged them to vote, and called on political decision-makers to take action.

The union - BETTER EQUAL - YOUR CHOICE.

Democracy and Social Cohesion.

The union in the German Trade Union Confederation (DGB).

In recent years, the union has strengthened its position within the German Trade Union Confederation (DGB) and reinforced its influence. This was achieved, in part, by successfully integrating the union's political perspective into the gender equality resolutions of the DGB, and by providing numerous contributions of its technical and substantive expertise to the various committees (including:

[The rest of the text is cut off here, but the above provides a comprehensive translation of the available content.]

...as well as through support for the DF's international work. Furthermore, since 2018, the union's secretary for labor policy, in her role as head of the "Promoting and Redistributing Care Work to the Political Agenda" working group, was also a member of the DF's executive board, serving as the DF's voice at many events and in numerous discussions with political decision-makers. As a result, she was elected as the deputy chair of the DF by its members in the summer of 2021. This ensures strong representation of the union's interests within the German Confederation of Trade Unions.

[Image: Kick-off event for the "Fairly Sharing Care Work" alliance: A panel discussion featuring, among others, Federal Minister for Family Affairs, Senior Citizens, Women and Youth Franziska Giffey (left) and the union's secretary for labor policy, Anja Weusthoff, discussing the fair distribution of unpaid care work between men and women. Photo: BMFSFJ_Eventfotografen]

Civil society alliance: The "Fairly Sharing Care Work" alliance.

With the aim of promoting the gender-equitable distribution of paid and unpaid work and closing the care gap between men and women, the civil society alliance "Fairly Sharing Care Work" was founded in the summer of 2020 with significant support from the union. It was presented at an online conference of the Federal Ministry for Family Affairs, Senior Citizens, Women and Youth (BMFSFJ) on September 4, 2020, under the title "Fairly Distributing Unpaid Care Work." The alliance brings together representatives from churches, unions, men's and social organizations, as well as self-help organizations, all working towards equal opportunities for all genders. It functions as a network that fosters the exchange of knowledge, initiates joint actions, raises public awareness of the social value of unpaid care and housework, and highlights its economic importance. Its 13 founding members are committed to raising awareness among politicians, businesses, academia, and society about the issue of the "care gap" (gender care gap) and working to close it. The coordination office of the alliance is managed by the German Confederation of Trade Unions.

Democracy and Social Cohesion: Equal treatment for LSBTTIQQAAP+ individuals.

Since the 21st Ordinary Federal Congress of the union, there has been a focus on issues related to the equal treatment of LSBTTIQQAAP+ individuals (Lesbians, Gays, Bisexuals, Transgender, Transsexual, Intersex, Queer, Questioning, Asexual, Allies, Pansexual, and other sexual orientations) within the union and society. In accordance with the union's resolution EO04, the union's federal executive board established a federal working group on LSBTTIQQAAP+ in mid-2018, with representatives from all union members appointed to the group. The working group meets twice a year to facilitate regular information sharing on current social and organizational policy priorities and developments in the union's work to combat the stigmatization and discrimination of LSBTTIQQAAP+ individuals based on their sexual and gender identity, and to ensure a common position of the union and its member unions on relevant political initiatives. An initial joint position was developed in the context of the long-overdue reform of the Transsexual Law, parts of which have already been declared unconstitutional. In May 2019, the union and its member unions issued a joint statement criticizing a draft law on amending the law on gender reassignment, which had been presented by the Federal Ministry of Justice and Consumer Protection (BMJV) and the Federal Ministry of the Interior and Community (BMI). From the union's perspective, the draft law did not achieve the goal of enabling transgender and intersex individuals to easily and affordably change their legal gender through a simple and orderly procedure, while respecting the constitutionally protected right to self-determination. Due to controversial debates within the Grand Coalition, the draft was ultimately withdrawn, and it was not possible to enact the necessary reform of the Transsexual Law during the previous legislative period. This issue remains a priority for the union and its member unions with the new federal government.

One key area of work related to LSBTI (Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender, Intersex) issues focused on the draft law presented by the Federal Ministry of Justice and Consumer Protection (BMJV) in February 2021, which aimed to replace the term "race" in Article 3, paragraph 3, sentence 1 of the Basic Law (Germany's constitution). The union and its affiliated unions urged the BMJV to use the planned amendment to the Basic Law to expand the scope of Article 3, paragraph 3, sentence 1, by adding "sexual identity" as a characteristic to the existing protection against discrimination based on gender. The union believes that such an amendment is long overdue to explicitly protect the rights of LGBTQ+ individuals (people with diverse sexual identities, gender expressions, and gender characteristics, such as lesbians, gay men, bisexuals, transgender people, intersex people, queer people, pansexual people, non-binary people, and asexual people). However, the BMJV's proposal also proved to be unable to garner consensus within the Grand Coalition during the previous legislative period. Therefore, the union and its affiliated unions will strongly advocate for the implementation of the planned amendment to the Basic Law during the current legislative period. Another important area of work involved monitoring the discussion surrounding the "EU Strategy for lesbian, gay, bisexual, trans, non-binary, intersex and queer (LGBTIQ) equality," presented by the EU Commission in November 2020. The union and its affiliated unions contributed to the development of the position of the European Trade Union Confederation (ETUC) and successfully ensured that all their concerns were reflected in the position paper. In the coming years, the focus will be on implementing the LGBTIQ strategy through national action plans of the EU member states. The union and its affiliated unions will actively support the development of the action program for Germany.

National and European Refugee Policy:

The refugee situation in Germany and Europe is shaped by armed conflicts, terrorist attacks, the seizure of power by fundamentalist groups, and the persecution of minorities in many countries of origin for asylum seekers. Nevertheless, primarily due to the agreement between the European Union and Turkey, as well as the border closures at the EU's external borders and the suspension of search and rescue operations in the Mediterranean, the number of asylum applications filed in the member states of the European Union has declined sharply since 2018. In 2018, there were approximately 185,000 applications, in 2019 about 165,000, and in 2020 around 122,000. The refugees seeking protection in Germany mainly come from Syria, Afghanistan, and Iraq. Since 2018, numerous amendments to the asylum law have been passed in Germany. The union has actively advocated for legislative proposals that facilitate access to employment and promote the integration of refugees. It has called for models of mentorship and sponsorship programs for refugees, as well as language training opportunities in the workplace. The new legal regulations now stipulate, among other things, stricter conditions for the deportation of rejected asylum seekers and the concentration of asylum seekers in reception centers. However, individuals with tolerated status are also given the opportunity to begin vocational training under strict conditions, and a residence permit for employment purposes (Section 8 60c of the Residence Act) is possible. By the end of 2020, approximately 1,600 people were able to begin vocational training under the status of Section 8 60c of the Residence Act. However, only just under 700 employment permits were granted by the end of 2020. The union has advocated for significantly lower requirements to enable a "change of status," from a humanitarian residence permit to a residence permit for employment purposes. Regular information materials on "Facts and Figures" on asylum have been published and offered to affiliated unions as a data source on refugees and asylum. The "New Pact on Migration and Asylum," published by the European Union in the autumn of 2020, includes legal and political instruments to shape the humanitarian reception of refugees in the EU. However, the proposals of the European Commission have been so controversial in the member states that no concrete results have been achieved. Civil society organizations, as well as the union, have expressed strong criticism of some of the proposals (e.g., asylum procedures at the external borders, the voluntary assumption of deportations of asylum seekers who are not recognized instead of the reception of refugees).

Skilled Worker Immigration to Germany: In 2019, the Skilled Worker Immigration Act was passed. This law aims to regulate immigration based on the economic needs of skilled workers. The union conducted a comprehensive analysis and evaluation of the draft law, focusing on issues such as the newly introduced visa processing regulations, the two-year commitment to employers, the recognition of qualifications, the possibility of changing jobs, and the monitoring of working conditions for newly recruited skilled workers. In many respects, the union can politically support the regulations that have been in effect since March 1, 2020. However, some aspects, such as the employer commitment requirement, are considered inappropriate. The Skilled Worker Immigration Act also provides for special regulations for the recruitment of skilled workers through agreements between national employment agencies. However, the union believes that these agreements should not be used to circumvent the examination of equivalent working and pay conditions.

Democracy and Social Cohesion: Livestream for the 60th anniversary of the signing of the recruitment agreement with Turkey and the presentation of the union's Böckler Medal, from left to right: Anja Piel (union), Irina Vavitsa (X), Erdogan Kaya (X), Sanem Kleff (X), October 30, 2021. Photo: Union/Vera Egenberger.

The union has worked with the Federal Employment Agency (BA) to develop counseling services for potential skilled workers, to structure the qualification recognition processes, and to provide support for employers. The union has provided input and suggestions to the BA-Gewerkschaft (union within the BA) and, in a specially organized expert discussion, has presented needs and suggestions for the design of these processes, some of which have been incorporated. Due to the pandemic and travel restrictions, the Skilled Worker Immigration Act has only been partially utilized. Only a limited number of skilled workers in the healthcare sector have been able to enter Germany under this law. The temporary extension of the Western Balkans regulation until the end of 2020 made it necessary to extend the regulation within the employment ordinance. As part of the legislative process, the union, together with its member unions, developed a position paper that rejects the extension of the Western Balkans regulation, arguing that the Skilled Worker Immigration Act already provides an adequate legal framework for allowing skilled workers from the Western Balkans to enter Germany for employment. In October 2020, the Bundesrat (Federal Council) approved the extension of the Western Balkans regulation without considering the union's arguments.

Integration and Participation: To further promote the integration and participation of immigrants, the union, in cooperation with the Friedrich Ebert Foundation (FES), held three expert discussions in 2020 and 2021 on integration, participation, and political participation of immigrants and their descendants, as well as refugees. These discussions aimed to redefine the union's position on integration and participation in the areas of employment, political and social participation. As a result, a policy paper on this topic was developed and coordinated with the member unions. The policy paper outlines progressive approaches to the participation and integration of immigrants in employment and society, and the union will use this as a basis for its future political statements on these issues.

On the occasion of the 60th anniversary of the signing of the recruitment agreement with Turkey, a livestream was held, during which the role of trade unions for the immigrants at that time was discussed. As part of the union's work on migration, a variety of national and European measures and programs were implemented. The goal was to reduce structural, institutional, and individual discrimination and inequality, to promote diversity within the union, and to empower affected workers and their representatives. At the European level, the union supported the "LabourINT" project (European exchange on labor market integration, integration through qualification) and the "InCoach" project (integrating asylum seekers and refugees into training and employment). Through its long-standing coordination of the network against racism, an exchange platform for anti-racism and self-organization groups of migrants and people affected by racism at the federal and state levels, the union maintains regular contact with relevant migrant self-organizations.

The union can thus reflect the experiences, assessments, and positions of migrant communities in its work.

**Counseling for Non-EU Nationals**

Building on the experience of counseling EU citizens, the union established a counseling service for refugees at the end of 2017. This service operates counseling centers in various federal states as part of the "Integration through Qualification (IQ)" funding program. In 2020, approximately 10,000 counseling sessions were conducted. The main countries of origin for those seeking advice are Syria, Afghanistan, Eritrea, Iraq, and Iran. Common issues addressed by the counseling centers include withheld wages for temporary workers during periods of inactivity, and the persistent employment of workers at wages below the legal minimum wage in small businesses. In many cases, the counseling centers were able to contribute to resolving the problems, for example, by securing back payments from employers.

**Peace Policy**

Based on resolution A002 "#NO2PERCENT - Peace takes a different approach!", the union's peace policy activities, supported by strong voluntary engagement within the union, have been significantly shaped since the 21st Ordinary Federal Congress by cooperation within the "Disarmament instead of Rearmament" initiative. Since the initiative's founding, the union has participated in its working group to mobilize against the newly unleashed global arms race and to advocate for a broader understanding of security that considers social security and decent work as essential pillars of peace promotion, focusing on crisis prevention, détente, and a concept of common security, rather than military build-up and deterrence. This approach emphasizes a socially and ecologically sustainable transformation of the economy and society, which is essential in the face of climate change and technological progress. The union has therefore called on the federal government, as part of the initiative, to jointly develop a corresponding strategy for civilian peacebuilding with its EU partners, and to move away from the NATO target of increasing arms spending to two percent of GDP. This is to avoid wasting further billions of public funds on weapons, and instead use them for urgently needed future investments. Against this backdrop, all of the union's calls to action for the "Day Against War" on September 1st have focused on the core message of abandoning the NATO two-percent target and investing in the future, combined with a call to the federal government to finally sign the UN Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons and to advocate for stricter control of arms exports both nationally and internationally. (See calls to action: 2018, 2019, 2020, 2021).

The so-called "Frankfurt Appeal," issued by the union in October 2020 in collaboration with its partners in the "Disarmament instead of Rearmament" initiative, called for a nationwide day of action against the two-percent target, which took place on December 5, 2020, in conjunction with the federal parliament's budget deliberations. Following the 2021 federal election, a joint action program was published to support the election campaign, advocating for a clear positioning of democratic parties in favor of a policy of disarmament and détente.

Beyond the joint activities within the "Disarmament instead of Rearmament" initiative, the union's peace work in recent years has been strongly influenced by the remembrance of the fascist reign of terror and the horrors of World War II. On September 1, 2019, the 80th anniversary of Nazi Germany's invasion of Poland, which plunged humanity into World War II, was commemorated. The union took this special day of remembrance as an opportunity to jointly conduct a two-day scenario workshop with the "Central European Young Trade Unionists Network" (CEYTUN) at the end of August 2019. This workshop brought together representatives of European youth unions to explore the importance of the peace project of a united Europe and to discuss its future prospects.

The year 2020 was marked by the 75th anniversary of the liberation from fascism and the end of World War II on May 8th, as well as the commemoration of the victims of the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki in August 1945.

Originally, a major commemorative event titled "Never Again! Remembering for Today and Tomorrow" was planned by the union to take place in Recklinghausen on the eve of Liberation Day, as part of the Ruhrfestspiele, focusing on democracy and social cohesion. However, due to the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic, this event had to be cancelled. In 2020, the union, together with X, organized a livestream program for International Peace Day, which focused on remembering the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki and warning about the horrific consequences of the renewed nuclear arms race between nuclear powers.

**Union History and Policy:**

During the reporting period, the union participated in the work of the "Cultures of Social Democracy" expert commission, established by the union's executive board in 2017 and based at the "Institute for Social Movements" in Bochum. This commission, composed of historians and union representatives, concluded its work in December 2020. In nine sessions, the commission addressed topics from a union history perspective, including "Social Democracy," "Social Security," "International Labor Organization and Social Policy," "The History of German Trade Unions," "Collective Bargaining Agreements," "Equality," "Gender Equality," "Worker Participation," "Dealing with the Nazi Past," "Migration," "Old and New Social Movements," and "The European Idea and Internationalism." Instead of the planned concluding conference in October 2020, four digital events were held in February and March 2021, where the commission's findings and recommendations were discussed, and questions about ways to promote union history, social democracy in the cultural history museum, and union and international commemorative cultures were explored. The commission's recommendations were also presented to the union's federal executive committee.

In October 2018, on the occasion of the 100th anniversary of the November Revolution, a scientific conference titled "The Union in Revolutionary Times - Europe 1917 to 1923" was held in Berlin in cooperation with the union and the Friedrich-Ebert Foundation. Also in October 2018, a celebration was held in Berlin under the title "100 Years of Social Partnership - Successfully into the Future," where the German Confederation of Employers' Associations and the union, in the presence of the Federal President, jointly commemorated the Stinnes Agreement of October 16, 1918, as the founding document of the current social partnership. On the 75th anniversary of the assassination of union member Wilhelm Leuschner by the Nazis on September 29, 1944, the union held a memorial event on September 30, 2019, with a visit to the execution site in Berlin-Plötzensee. The union's 70th anniversary was celebrated on October 21, 2019, with a ceremony at which Chancellor Angela Merkel emphasized in her speech the importance of unions and strong collective bargaining agreements for social cohesion in Germany. On the occasion of the 75th anniversary of the end of World War II and the Nazi dictatorship, the union, together with the "Archive of Social Democracy" of the Friedrich-Ebert Foundation, published a brochure titled "Driven Underground. Forced to Flee. Murdered. Union Members under Nazi Rule." This publication aims to bring the names of union members who paid for their resistance to the Nazi regime with their lives into public awareness. On May 8, 2021, a resource guide titled "Remembering, Commemorating, Acting - Protecting and Strengthening Democracy!" was published to support the call for a nationwide statutory holiday on May 8th.

**Media and Cultural Policy:**

**Media Policy:**

Public service media and their supervisory bodies have traditionally been the focus of media policy conferences organized jointly by X and the union. During the reporting period, three such conferences were held: on March 7/8, 2018 ("Under Pressure: Public Service Broadcasting Between Austerity Measures and Digital Competition"), on February 6/7, 2020 ("Open for Renovation! Arguments for a Reform of Public Service Media"), and on October 14/15, 2021 ("This is Our Program! Public Service Broadcasting Between Mandate and Societal Expectations").

The chairs of the union's affiliated trade union and its executive board regularly meet with the directors of public broadcasters for political discussions in the media sector, a forum known as the Königsteiner Gespräche. During the reporting period, there were three meetings: on October 2, 2018, November 3, 2020, and October 5, 2021. The latter two meetings were organized as video conferences due to the ongoing pandemic. Topics discussed included the development of broadcasting fees, the digital future of media, the public service mandate, responsibility for quality, transparency, and diversity, the increasingly violence-ridden working conditions of journalists, and "working in the age of Corona." In the spring of 2018, the union was one of the initiators of a joint statement by 23 civil society organizations, published on June 13, 2018. Organizations from the fields of education, labor, culture, media, religion, environment, consumer protection, business, and social welfare advocated for strong public broadcasters and their solid financial foundation. At the same time, they called on the state premiers to implement a forward-looking reform: offerings funded by contributions should be as widely accessible as possible through the network. Legally mandated retention periods, the criterion of press similarity, and the principle of relevance to broadcasting should be abolished. A declared goal of the union's media policy work is to support all colleagues who have been appointed by the union's affiliated trade union to committees of public and commercial media and the state media authorities. Therefore, regular media policy information was provided, and video conferences were organized, sometimes with the participation of external experts. In particular, the internal part of the media policy meetings was used for exchange and networking among committee members. The union submitted written comments on the national implementation of the copyright directive and the Telemedia Act amendment concept. In 2020, two studies commissioned by the union were at the center of its media policy work: "Enabling Public Participation. Transparency, Oversight, and Public Broadcasting in Germany" by media scientist Dominik Speck. In it, he compares the current state of transparency among broadcasters. In addition, the author provides concrete recommendations for action for union representatives on broadcasting councils and the radio and television council. The Berlin daily newspaper "Tagesspiegel" reported on the union's expertise on March 26, 2020, and the Evangelical Press Service (epd) documented the full text in June 2020. The study "Media Patron Google: How the Data Corporation Courts Journalism" was created in cooperation with the Otto Brenner Union. It analyzes how and why Google has given away more than 200 million euros to European media since 2013 and what impact the data corporation's contributions have on the independence of the German media landscape. After its publication on October 26, 2020, the study was not only picked up by numerous media journalists but also resonated in media and communication studies.

**Democracy and Social Cohesion - Cultural Policy**

In its cultural work, the union was able to build on the success of the "Speeches on Change" format from 2017 with its partners, the Berliner Festspiele and the German Culture Council. Shortly before the European elections, the program in April was "New Dreams for Europe," and in December, the topic was "How do we want to work?" The format deliberately brings together people from different areas of society, and interaction with the audience is explicitly encouraged. The events were broadcast live on the website of the media partner Deutschlandradio. In 2019, the union's film prize went to the feature film "Systemsprenger." Laura Pooth, chairwoman of X-Niedersachsen, presented the award to director Nora Fingscheidt, lead actress Helena Zengel, and producer Peter Hartwig. Photo: Union.

The work in the field of film was also a priority. In 2019, the union organized numerous cinema evenings and discussions across Germany on the documentary film "The Last Jolly Boy," which had been awarded the union's film prize the previous year. The film shows the painful journey of Holocaust survivor Leon Schwarzbaum to the places of his childhood and union, including the Nazi concentration camp Auschwitz.

Leon Schwarzbaum was able to attend both the premiere in Hanover and a screening in Berlin, where he shared stories from his life. In 2019, the Trade Union Film Prize went to the feature film "Systemsprenger." In 2020, the Emden Film Festival – and therefore the presentation of the Trade Union Film Prize – had to be canceled due to the COVID-19 pandemic. In 2021, "Dear Future Children" received the highest rating from the audience in the trade union competition for socially engaged films. The documentary portrays three young trade unionists from Hong Kong, Chile, and Uganda who are committed to democracy, social justice, and environmental protection. The film was written and directed by Franz Böhm (born in 1999), and was largely financed through donations. On November 23, 2021, the trade union organized a special screening of the film in Berlin. In 2020, the focus of cultural activities was on the 75th anniversary of the end of the war. On January 27, 2020, the eve of the Holocaust Remembrance Day, the trade union and Heinrich-Böll Foundation in Berlin jointly screened Claude Lanzmann's film "Shoah" from 1985. The partners followed a call from the Berlin International Literature Festival to show this film worldwide. Despite its length of 9.5 hours and its disturbing subject matter, approximately 100 viewers attended the film screening. On September 1, 2020, the trade union, together with the Association of German Writers (VS) and the city's representative for art and culture, organized a livestream for the International Day of Peace. A key focus of the 90-minute program was the commemoration of the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki 75 years ago. The chairman of the Japanese trade union federation RENGO participated via a video message. In 2021, a collaboration with the Berliner Maxim Gorki Theater was realized for the International Day of Peace. Under the title "War and Peace in the 21st Century," Reiner Hoffmann, chairman of the trade union, discussed, among other things, what a new security policy based on cooperation could look like, despite war, human rights violations, and the effects of climate change. The event was broadcast as a livestream and recorded by Deutschlandfunk Kultur. At the initiative of board member Stefan Körzell, the trade union was able to collaborate with the writer Anne Weber and the author and journalist Julia in 2021. The International Day of Peace went online for the first time in 2020: Moderator Lena Falkenhagen spoke with Kübra Böler. The slam poet, who was connected from Hamburg, performed Kurt Tucholsky's anti-war poem "Three Minutes of Attention." Democracy and Social Cohesion The trade union. At 7:00 PM, our livestream begins. On October 7, 2021, on the occasion of the World Day for Decent Work, the journalist and filmmaker Julia Friedrichs read from her book and discussed with Stefan Körzell, a member of the trade union's board. Friedrichs enlists prominent cultural figures for readings and discussions on annual and memorial days. On May 8, Anne Weber read from her work "Annette, a Heroine Epic," for which she received the German Book Prize in the same year. The work is based on the life story of the doctor and resistance fighter Anne Beau-manoir. In cooperation with the Ruhrfestspiele, the trade union commemorated the end of World War II, the liberation from fascism, and the political demand of the trade union to make May 8 a national holiday. On October 7, on the occasion of the World Day for Decent Work, Julia Friedrichs read from her book "Working Class. Why we need work that we can live from." Julia Friedrichs has accompanied people who work hard but still struggle to make ends meet for this project. In the subsequent discussion with Stefan Körzell, the focus was on the causes and the question of what a higher minimum wage and more collective bargaining agreements can achieve. Democracy and Social Cohesion 33D. The Future of Work D. The Future of Work Collective bargaining, co-determination, and workers' rights Collective bargaining in general The rate of collective bargaining in companies has again declined during the reporting period. Collective bargaining opt-outs, membership in organizations that do not offer collective bargaining, and the loss of collective bargaining due to (chain) company transfers as a result of restructuring or outsourcing are still commonplace. The trade union has therefore made strengthening collective bargaining a central theme of its political work during the reporting period. In 2017, a position paper was adopted, which the trade union and its member unions used to participate in political debates and reform processes in this context.

Due to changes in the political and legal framework, an update of the paper was necessary. Therefore, 15 key demands were developed for policymakers, which have received considerable attention in the public. As a result, the union has been feeding its demands for strengthening collective bargaining into the political debate through various channels. This included major events, such as the conference "Strong Collective Agreements for a Good Life," which was held as a live stream in November 2020 due to the pandemic. The issue was also advanced through press articles, newsletters, and direct discussions with politicians. The union published a report in October 2021. This report highlighted the societal "costs" of declining collective bargaining coverage for Germany and its federal states. For example, social security systems lose approximately 30 billion euros annually due to employees not being covered by collective agreements. This translates to 41.6 billion euros in reduced social security contributions and 29.8 billion euros in reduced income tax revenue. Overall, the lack of collective bargaining coverage directly impacts the purchasing power of employees: if comprehensive collective bargaining coverage existed, employees would have approximately 42 billion euros more in their pockets each year. The union has received positive media attention and has fueled the debate about collective bargaining in Germany.

Within the union, strengthening collective bargaining was a key priority. During the reporting period, events were held at both the federal and local levels. All of this has contributed to creating a "societal baseline" in favor of collective bargaining in recent years, which has led to the issue being included in the electoral platforms of almost all democratic parties and in many coalition agreements at the state level.

**General Applicability of Collective Agreements (AVE)**

During the reporting period, the union served as the contact point for the Federal Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs (BMAS) regarding all matters related to the general applicability of collective agreements. The union also regularly provided representation on the collective bargaining committee at the BMAS to ensure that collective agreements could be declared generally applicable. This ensured the validity of, among other things, industry-wide minimum wages and regulations regarding common facilities at the federal level.

In the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic, the implementing regulations of the Collective Agreements Act were amended to allow committees and decision-making bodies to operate through video and telephone conferences. In August 2020, the union issued a statement on this "Third Amendment to the Ordinance for the Implementation of the Collective Agreements Act," in which it reiterated its critical position, consistent with the union's stance on the "Draft Law to Ensure the Functionality of Labor and Social Courts during the COVID-19 Pandemic and to Amend Other Laws" of April 24, 2020. Unfortunately, due to the subsequently adopted opposing regulations in the Collective Agreements Act, it was not possible to achieve the very strict requirements demanded by the union for conducting video and telephone conferences, nor to implement a deadline for these regulations until June 30, 2021.

The union has been advocating for political changes in legislation to facilitate the use of the general applicability of collective agreements. In all publications and other activities aimed at strengthening collective bargaining, the reform of the AVE was a central point. Through its public relations and lobbying efforts to strengthen the AVE, the union has achieved initial successes during the reporting period. In April 2021, the federal states of Bremen, Berlin, and Thuringia launched a Bundesrat initiative to reform the AVE, largely adopting the demands of the union. The call for strengthening this instrument was also included in the electoral platforms of the SPD, Alliance 90/The Greens, The Left, and the CDU/CSU.

[Images of the union]

**Collective Agreements for Temporary Work**

[Further text about collective agreements for temporary work is truncated in the provided text.]

In December 2019, the unions reached a collective bargaining agreement for approximately 750,000 temporary workers in the industry. Prior to this, internal union discussions were held to develop common demands, which led to successful collective bargaining negotiations. This agreement resulted in numerous improvements in working conditions. Notably, for the first time in the industry, a membership benefit was achieved. This benefit amounts to at least €100 per year for each of the two annual bonuses, increasing to a maximum of €700 depending on the length of employment and the year of payment. To ensure the membership benefit is implemented as legally soundly as possible, a separate procedural agreement was concluded. In addition, wage increases, more vacation days, and higher holiday and Christmas bonuses were agreed upon. The annual wage increases range from 1.9% to 4.1%. It is worth noting that the 2016 collective bargaining agreement already achieved full wage equalization between East and West Germany, effective April 1, 2021, at which point the wage table for Eastern Germany was eliminated. Furthermore, the wage bands were revised, significantly improving the situation for temporary workers with basic qualifications through a new, additional wage band 2b. The collective bargaining agreement has a term of 36 months, with an initial termination option at December 31, 2022. Subsequently, the union coordinated a request to set the minimum wage for temporary workers in accordance with Section 3a of the Temporary Work Act, which then came into effect. The first payment of the membership benefit with the June 2021 salary was prominently announced on the union's website.

Collective Bargaining Agreements for Self-Employed Individuals
In 2021, the European Commission's Directorate-General for Competition launched an initiative to ensure that EU competition rules do not hinder collective bargaining by self-employed individuals. In February 2021, the union participated in a "preliminary impact assessment" of the EU Commission, in collaboration with its member unions. In May 2021, it participated in a public consultation on the subject, both independently and through the European Trade Union Confederation. In April 2021, the union presented the German positions within the framework of the social partner hearing of the responsible Directorate-General for Competition.

Teleworking
The union coordinated the application for binding regulations in the Joint Teleworking Committee at the Federal Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs and represented the interests of employees working from home in the committee meetings, together with union X. This resulted in wage increases for these employees. At the same time, the union ensured that the interests of employees working from home were adequately considered when updating the framework for wage increases in 2018, in consultation with the Federal Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs and the employers' association.

Employee Co-determination in Germany and Europe
The beginning and end of the reporting period were marked by works council elections, which take place every four years. The 2018 elections were accompanied by a public awareness campaign organized by the union. Content and materials for the companies were created jointly with the member unions and produced. The same applies to the measures to support the works council elections in 2022, which began in mid-2021. The union provided content and personnel support for information sessions organized by unions X and the European industry union regarding the changed situation in the European Works Councils and SE Works Councils following Brexit.

In 2020 and 2021, the COVID-19 pandemic was the dominant issue. This also applied to employee co-determination, as measures often had to be implemented in companies under great time pressure, which were previously considered unfeasible. This particularly concerned issues such as mobile work/home office, regulations regarding short-time work, as well as various workplace safety measures and hygiene plans that became necessary due to social distancing regulations. The corresponding ordinances and temporary laws had to be developed under enormous time pressure. The union coordinated the intensive union consultation processes and was able to exert its political influence, especially on these regulations. A key milestone for the entire reporting period was the implementation of the relevant agreements in the coalition agreement of the 19th legislative period.

The Works Council Modernization Act, which came into force in June 2021, addressed points from the coalition agreement. It also regulated issues that had come to the forefront due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The coalition agreement specifically addressed facilitating works council elections, improving protection for those initiating works council activities, and expanding the rights of initiative and co-determination in the introduction and implementation of in-house training programs. The temporary exceptions necessitated by the COVID-19 pandemic, which had proven useful in some cases, were intended to be incorporated into a permanent solution. In the area of works council co-determination, this particularly applied to a provision that would allow works councils to conduct meetings via video or telephone conference.

**The Future of Work**

The Works Council Modernization Act addressed all of these points and generally implemented them positively. However, not all trade union demands were met. The Works Council Modernization Act is merely the implementation of the agreements from the coalition agreement and not the necessary reform of the works council system. The legal changes represent adjustments to the realities of the workplace, but do not provide a future-proof foundation for the works council system. Important trade union demands remain unaddressed, so this issue will remain on the agenda.

**Corporate Co-determination in Germany and Europe**

In their coalition agreement, adopted in March 2018, the CDU/CSU and SPD agreed: "We will ensure that national regulations on co-determination are maintained even in the case of cross-border relocations of companies." Unfortunately, the grand coalition has not lived up to this self-imposed standard. This is particularly true for the "Company Law Package" presented by the EU Commission on April 25, 2018, which introduced procedures for cross-border mergers, divisions, and consolidations of capital companies. During the reporting period, the trade union worked closely with [Organization X] and its affiliated unions to advocate for a progressive implementation of the legislative package. Through numerous events, letters, and personal conversations, the trade union advocated for far-reaching regulations to protect and expand corporate co-determination. A significant partial success was the position of the European Parliament, adopted on January 17, 2019, with a clear majority of 501 to 112 votes, which incorporated many important trade union demands. However, the European Parliament has only been able to enforce this progressive position against the other European institutions on a limited basis. The trilogue result of March 13, 2019, despite some improvements over the Commission's draft, fell far short of the trade union's demands. Against this background, the trade union has also strongly advocated for the protection of corporate co-determination at the European level during the reporting period, particularly by developing key points for a European framework directive on the subject of information, consultation, and corporate co-determination, which was adopted by the trade union on February 11, 2020, and which was largely incorporated into a position paper adopted by [Organization X] at the end of 2020. Unfortunately, despite various political discussions at the German and European levels, it was not possible to include this demand in the political program of the German EU Council Presidency in the second half of 2020.

The implementation of the Shareholders' Rights Directive was also important for corporate co-determination. It is a success of the political communication of the trade union that the law adopted in 2019 to implement the second Shareholders' Rights Directive (ARUG II) stipulates that the remuneration structure for the management board of listed companies must now be aligned with both the sustainable and the long-term development of the company, and that the (co-determined) supervisory board must now set a maximum remuneration for members of the management board. However, the coalition was able to ensure that this maximum remuneration can be reduced by the general meeting, which tends to strengthen the rights of shareholders.

During the reporting period, the union and its affiliated unions have repeatedly and forcefully advocated for closing legal loopholes that allow companies to avoid employee co-determination in national law. However, in 2021, it was not possible to amend the Financial Market Integrity Strengthening Act, which was proposed in the wake of the Wirecard scandal, to include effective protections for employee co-determination in German law. Nevertheless, the parliamentary process resulted in ensuring that employee representatives on the audit committee also had the additional information rights that were initially intended only for the committee chair. Furthermore, in view of the 2021 federal election, the union was able to raise public and political awareness of the issue of employee co-determination and incorporate key co-determination-related demands into the platforms of important democratic parties. This is evidenced by, among other things, a motion by the parliamentary group of Alliance 90/The Greens on March 23, 2021, entitled "Strengthening employee co-determination - closing legal loopholes," a resolution by the SPD party executive on June 21, 2021, entitled "More democracy in companies and workplaces - for a comprehensive development of co-determination," and a number of compelling demands from the electoral programs of Alliance 90/The Greens, the Left Party, and the SPD for the 2021 federal election. A key role was played by the "Co-determination secures the future" campaign of the Gewerkschaft-Böckler-Stiftung (Gewerkschaft-Böckler Foundation) in 2021, which was supported by the union in terms of content and organization. As part of the campaign, two public events were held on June 7, 2021, and August 31, 2021, each of which was opened by a programmatic speech by the union president, Reiner Hoffmann. As part of the successful campaign, various key stakeholders from politics, business, and society publicly expressed their support for co-determination and its strengthening. The demands for closing loopholes to prevent employee co-determination were also the subject of the Böckler conferences for supervisory board members, organized in cooperation with the union by the Gewerkschaft-Böckler-Stiftung in the years 2018, 2019, 2020, and 2021, which featured prominent politicians and focused on the "Future of Work," with the 2020 and 2021 conferences being offered as livestreams due to the pandemic. Overall, during the reporting period, starting in early 2020, the issue of employee co-determination was heavily influenced by the COVID-19 pandemic. With regard to the elections for the employee representatives on the supervisory board, the union coordinated information and recommendations for practical guidance on supervisory board elections with its affiliated unions, which were published, among other places, on the union's co-determination portal. The revision of the German Corporate Governance Code also falls within the reporting period. On November 6, 2018, the German Corporate Governance Code Commission published the first draft. Due to strong pressure from various German stakeholders (including the union), the commission had to withdraw some of the most controversial proposals in the draft version adopted on May 22, 2019, such as the recommendation to reduce the term of office for shareholder representatives on the supervisory board.

**Mobile Working and Digitalization of the Union**

In recent years, the union has been successful in further integrating its demands for the digitalization of the union into the political discourse and establishing them there. The often technology-centered debate about the future of work has thus been expanded to include important requirements for socially responsible technology design. A key focus of the discussion has been the design of mobile work and home office. In 2019, the union developed a "discussion paper" on mobile work and home office, which was subsequently developed into a position paper (November 2020) in the context of the challenges posed by the COVID-19 pandemic. The proposal was taken up by the Federal Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs (BMAS), but not implemented by the coalition government.

[Image: Gewerkschaft-Podcast project "Wissen macht Arbeit" presented at the Federal Ministry of Education and Research as part of the "Union of the Future" science year 2018. Photo: Gewerkschaft]

Within the framework of the "Works Council Modernization Act," the co-determination rights of works councils in the design of mobile work have been improved. A legal framework for mobile work and home office remains an important political goal for the union to improve the working time autonomy of employees. In this context, the union has successfully prevented attempts by employer and business associations to deregulate the working time law with regard to daily maximum working hours and rest periods. Another focus was the issue of artificial intelligence (AI). In January 2019, the union published the "Artificial Intelligence and the Work of Tomorrow" policy paper, which was further elaborated in May 2020 into a concept paper "Artificial Intelligence (AI) for Good Work."

At the re:publica 2019 conference, the union organized a session titled "At our company, Siri is called Mary. AI is changing work." Photo: Union. Oliver Suchy, Head of the "Digital Union and Union Reporting" department of the union, at the LABOR.A 2020 conference. Photo: Gergross & Glowinski.

Nationally, the union has provided intensive advice to the German government in the development of the AI strategy and has contributed union demands to the AI platform "Learning Systems" of the Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF), as well as to the "Work 4.0/AI Focus Group" and the AI Observatory of the Federal Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs (BMAS). As part of the "Learning Systems" (PLS) platform of the BMBF, the union initiated and developed the white paper "Introduction of AI Systems in Companies - Building Blocks for Change Management," which was published in November 2020. This allowed the union to contribute significant and recognized contributions to the use of AI within the union. The union also participated in other expert publications of the PLS on topics such as "Criteria for Human-Machine Interaction in AI" (2020) and "AI Skills" (2021). Within the framework of the BMAS, the union played a significant role in shaping the funding guidelines for AI "experimental spaces." In addition, on November 25, 2019, the union presented its assessments of changes in the world of work due to AI and political requirements to the German Bundestag's Inquiry Committee. In numerous events with political parties and prominent figures in the technology scene, such as Microsoft or IBM, the union has helped shape the public discussion about AI. Since June 2020, the union has been a member of the "Future of Work" working group of the international "Global Partnership on AI" (GPAI) and the OECD expert network "ONE AI." Through these channels, the union has contributed its demands for implementation processes for AI applications in companies at the international level. At the European level, the union has commented on the EU Commission's guidelines for "trustworthy AI" and has taken a position on the EU Commission's proposed regulation (Artificial Intelligence Act).

The "Works Council Modernization Act" stipulates that works councils can involve experts in AI applications to assess the implementation of their tasks when introducing or using artificial intelligence. However, contrary to union demands, it remains the case that agreement must be reached between employers and works councils, especially regarding the person and the amount of the honorarium. The union's design requirements for AI have been publicly communicated through various dialogue formats, such as the LABOR.A 2021 conference.

At the hybrid LABOR.A 2021 conference organized by the union, the union held a session titled "European Regulatory Approaches for Artificial Intelligence in the Union." Photo: Union.

The union has also positioned itself on the design requirements for new forms of work, such as digitally organized platform work. In October 2019, the union adopted a "Discussion Paper on the Design of Platform Work" and, in March 2021, developed it into a position paper "Rules for Platform Work." The German government has addressed the issue with a discussion paper from the BMAS, but has not yet implemented it.

At the European level, a social partner consultation began in February 2021, with the aim of improving working conditions in the platform economy. The union participated in this process through the European Trade Union Confederation (X). A key focus of the union's work was the further development of work research, with a view to humanizing the union, particularly in the context of digital transformation. To this end, the union successfully contributed to the design of the BMBF research program "Innovation for Production, Services and Work for the Future," which ended in 2020, and actively participated in the conception of the follow-up research program "Future of Value Creation and Work," which was launched in March 2021, as part of the BMBF's advisory group. In addition, the union has been a member of the "Future of Value Creation" program advisory board of the BMBF since September 2021. In this context, the union was involved in the European work research conference "beyondwork.2020" of the BMBF and, together with its member unions, focused particularly on the socially responsible transformation of work. To promote the transfer of research findings in the context of decent work, the union supported research projects within the framework of the BMBF research program "Future of Work" and within the framework of the "New Quality of Work" (INQA) initiative.

**Future of Work**

An innovative transfer concept was implemented by the union as part of the 2018 "Future Workplaces" science year. In the six-part podcast series "Knowledge Creates Work," various design requirements and concepts – on the topic of the digitalization of work – were presented from the perspectives of researchers, company representatives, and social partners. This format received a wide response and was consistently well-received. The union closely followed the "Council of Unions" established by the BMAS in 2019 and publicly addressed the results of the union's reporting. The theme of "Digitalization of the Union" was also reflected in the large-scale participation process of the union, called "Union," which was launched in 2018. The union's design requirements for the future of work were widely discussed and reflected in the dialogue process.

**Congress on Digital Capitalism**

The union has deepened the public discussion on how rationalization effects and the benefits of digitalization can be used to humanize work and promote a fairer distribution of working time. As a co-organizer of the "Digital Capitalism" congress, it was able to exert a significant influence on the design of the congress, which is held annually with approximately 1,000 participants. The so-called DigiCap took place for the fifth time in 2021. In addition to re:publica and LABOR.Agile, it is one of the major digital conferences in the capital. The discussions organized by the union with experts and political figures on the power of internet monopolies, the role of unions in digitalization processes, and changes and flexibilization of digital jobs (the platform economy) generated great public interest and promoted debates on the issue of "humanization through digitalization." In particular, concepts of "agile work" were discussed in detail with union colleagues in various congress forums, with a focus on new possibilities for self-determined working time.

**Abuse of Contract Work and Temporary Employment/Mini-Jobs, Unjustified Fixed-Term Contracts**

**Contract Work**

The past few years have shown that the changes associated with the amendment to the Temporary Work Act (introduction of § 611a BGB) have hardly contributed to the hoped-for reduction in abusive contract work and sham self-employment. Service and contract agreements continue to contribute to a decline in collective bargaining coverage, poorer working and pay conditions for employees in outsourced companies, and a division of the workforce in many industries and occupations. This also makes it more difficult for unions to organize, for employees to be willing to engage in industrial action, and for employee co-determination to function effectively. The German meat industry is a prime example of this. For years, there have been particularly inhumane conditions for employees, mostly from Eastern and Southeastern Europe, who were employed by subcontractors of large meat companies.

The "employment model" in the meat processing industry, prior to the ban on temporary work and agency contracts in January 2021, primarily involved shifting responsibility for recruitment, accommodation, working conditions, and employee health and safety from the slaughterhouse to a network of easily replaceable subcontractors. The consequences of this were particularly evident in 2020, when numerous slaughterhouses experienced mass outbreaks of COVID-19. Finally, the federal government responded to decades of demands from the union, X, and the findings of counseling centers for mobile workers – primarily the union-sponsored project, Gewerkschaft – with the necessary and appropriate legal regulations. With the repeal of the Work Safety Control Act in December 2020, the use of external personnel in the meat processing industry through agency contracts was completely prohibited, and the provision of temporary workers was severely restricted. This law is a major victory for the union. Temporary employment agencies have filed a constitutional complaint against the law, seeking to reverse the ban on temporary work in the meat processing industry. They argue that certain provisions of the law are incompatible with the freedom of occupation guaranteed by the Basic Law. The union and X are preparing to participate in the proceedings before the Federal Constitutional Court. The Work Safety Control Act also included a provision for an evaluation of the use of external personnel in the meat processing industry in 2023. The union and X, as well as counseling centers such as Gewerkschaft, are likely to be involved in background discussions and case studies as part of this evaluation. The near-complete ban on the use of external personnel in this industry could provide a new and improved basis for the future – potentially cross-industry – fight against and containment of temporary work and agency contracts in general. The union, in collaboration with its member organizations, will investigate in which areas agency contracts are also being used abusively and what political and legislative consequences are still necessary for better regulation.

Temporary Work: Since 2018, the number of employees in temporary work has been steadily declining. In 2020, the average annual number of temporary workers was 783,000. This decline may be due to the effects of legal changes in the Temporary Work Act (AUG) regarding the maximum duration of temporary assignments, as well as equal pay and equal treatment, since April 2017, and the economic slowdown that began in the second half of 2018. Temporary work remains a precarious form of employment with a significantly higher risk of unemployment. Three-quarters of the employment relationships that ended in the first half of 2020 lasted less than a year, and nearly a quarter lasted less than a month. Temporary work also remains a dominant form of employment in auxiliary roles. 53 percent of temporary workers perform tasks at the auxiliary level, even though only 27 percent have no vocational or academic training. In addition, 38 percent of temporary workers in 2020 held foreign passports. While the Federal Employment Agency and the temporary employment industry consider this to be an integration success, the union sees the risk of migrants remaining in this precarious form of employment, with low wages, a lack of training opportunities, and a high risk of unemployment. According to Section 8, Paragraph 20 of the Temporary Work Act, the law should have been evaluated in 2020. However, the results of the evaluation are still awaited due to delays caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. The union had advocated for a comprehensive evaluation of the entire Temporary Work Act, not just the changes introduced in 2017. This position could not be implemented. The union was available to the institute (IAW Tübingen) responsible for the evaluation report as an interview partner and was also able to successfully connect interview partners from the member organizations, who contributed union insights and positions to the evaluation process. The union will provide additional comments on the evaluation report.

Mini-Jobs: So-called "mini-jobs," which involve millions of employees with low wages, remain firmly entrenched in the labor market. In recent years, there has been an increase in mini-jobs as a second job, leading to a fragmentation of employment relationships.

The negative effects of these special social and tax regulations on the labor market are numerous: de-skilling and weakening of the skilled workforce, fragmentation of employment relationships, a "lock-in" effect, unrealized desired working hours, a driver of the low-wage sector due to "jobs of the future" with low gross hourly wages, regular violations of employee rights, etc. Furthermore, two-thirds of mini-job holders are union members. With the small income from a mini-job, they cannot achieve financial independence. The precariousness of this employment model was once again evident during the Corona crisis: hundreds of thousands lost their mini-jobs and were left with nothing, as mini-job holders are not entitled to unemployment benefits or short-time work allowance. In 2021, the union developed concrete proposals for a reform of "mini-jobs" and brought them into the political process, primarily during coalition negotiations. The union is committed to integrating low-wage mini-jobs into the general labor market and eliminating special regulations for these employment relationships. However, some employees rely on the additional income from a mini-job. For this reason, there needs to be a mechanism to offset the disadvantages associated with low incomes, which should at least partially compensate for the massive subsidies currently provided for net income. During the previous legislative period, there were repeated calls for an increase and dynamic adjustment of the mini-job limit. These were successfully prevented until the federal election, also thanks to the efforts of the union. In view of the 2021 federal election and the urgent need for reform in the area of part-time employment, the "Mini must become big!" toolkit was updated. It provides information on the topic of mini-jobs with current figures, data, and facts, supported by arguments, event concepts, and action ideas. However, in the exploratory talks, the SPD, the Greens, and the FDP agreed that the mini-job limit should in the future be based on a weekly working time of 10 hours at minimum wage conditions. Accordingly, it should be increased in line with the minimum wage, which is being raised to 520 euros. This contradicts the coalition's commitment that mini-jobs should no longer be used as a substitute for regular employment relationships or as a trap for part-time work, especially for union members. The union continues to advocate for the conversion of part-time employment into employment subject to social security contributions. We rejected the regulation on mini-jobs formulated in the exploratory talks. We do not want further adjustments in conjunction with minimum wage increases, but rather a reform of the mini-job regulations. The union also continues to advocate for the elimination of tax and contribution-related obstacles in the transition from mini-jobs to "midi-jobs," so that an extension of working hours is more attractive and existing break-even points are avoided, without placing too much financial burden on employees in mini-jobs and without depriving social security systems of contributions. Mini-job holders must be better protected socially, at least through a pension insurance scheme without the option to opt out. Inclusion in unemployment insurance and the creation of a right to sickness benefits must also be made possible. Unjustified fixed-term contracts The union participated in the preparation of the reform of fixed-term employment law, which was announced in the coalition agreement, with the aim of limiting unjustified fixed-term contracts and preventing the abuse of fixed-term contract chains. The federal government had repeatedly postponed the reform, which was announced for the middle of 2019. On April 15, 2021, the BMAS (Federal Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs) presented a draft bill that aimed to restrict unjustified fixed-term contracts and so-called "chain contracts," but these reform efforts were ultimately rejected. In the autumn of 2020, the reform of fixed-term employment law became the subject of parliamentary debates, in connection with a public hearing on the relevant motion by the AfD parliamentary group (BT-Drs. 19/1841).

In its statement on the application and during the hearing, the union reaffirmed its demands for the reform of temporary employment law: restricting abusive and potentially abusive temporary employment practices by abolishing temporary contracts without a valid reason, and revising the rules for temporary contracts based on a valid reason (limiting abuse through chained temporary contracts, especially for temporary replacements and due to a supposedly temporary need, and eliminating the "budgetary" and "trial period" justifications). In connection with the Federal Council initiative "Supplementing economic stimulus programs with deregulation" (BT-Drs. 582/20), the black-yellow coalition in the state of North Rhine-Westphalia called for the maximum duration of temporary contracts without a valid reason to be extended from two to three years, and the maximum number of extensions to be increased from three to four. This proposal is an attempt to shift the entire entrepreneurial risk of an uncertain economic situation onto employees. The union strongly rejected this proposal. Companies can still, if their economic situation requires it, place their employees on short-time work or even terminate their employment for operational reasons. Such terminations are subject to clear criteria, which require not only a vague "deterioration" of the economic situation, but also a careful balance between the company's needs and the employees' circumstances. The union has continued to address this demand to the political parties in the run-up to the 2021 federal election.

**Subsidies for household services**

For years, the demand for household services has been increasing, without a corresponding supply available in the labor market. The majority of employment in this sector still takes place in precarious forms of employment, such as undeclared work, despite the improved registration process for household helpers and despite the possibility of including legally provided services in the tax return. The union, in consultation with the relevant member organizations, has developed a concept proposal based on the so-called "Belgian model," demonstrating the feasibility of implementation through refinancing. According to calculations by the union, approximately 1.5 million regular full-time positions in the field of household services would be possible. The concept is based on a shift towards certified service agencies that offer "jobs of the future," where a state subsidy (voucher) can be redeemed. These certified companies, in turn, guarantee employment based on fair labor practices, social security, training, proper compensation, quality assurance, and compliance with health and safety regulations. The proposal has been discussed and further developed with various political actors (SPD, Alliance 90/The Greens, The Left). In close collaboration with associations and institutions (e.g., Deutscher Hauswirtschaftsrat, Deutscher Gewerkschaftsrat, PQHD - Competence Center for Professionalization and Quality Assurance of Household Services, BMFSFJ), the model was presented and explained at various public events, and was received with great approval.

**Minimum Wage**

At the 21st Ordinary General Meeting in 2018, the union was given a mandate to further develop the statutory minimum wage to a level that ensures a decent living. During the reporting period, many activities, events, and measures took place in this area. The union placed the demand for a minimum wage of 12 euros in the public discussion and established it as a key issue. As a result, the further development of the statutory minimum wage became a central theme in the 2021 federal election. Plans for further development in the interests of employees were included in the election programs of the SPD, Alliance 90/The Greens, and The Left. Furthermore, the coalition agreement between the SPD, Alliance 90/The Greens, and the FDP includes an announcement to raise the minimum wage to 12 euros. The union was also able to directly influence the minimum wage level and achieved significant successes during the COVID-19 pandemic. In the minimum wage commission in 2020, several demands of the union were met. First, it was decided to increase the statutory minimum wage four times in total, from the beginning of 2021 to the end of 2022. The employers' demand for a "jobs of the future" initiative with a zero-round on the minimum wage was thus rejected. Second, the union succeeded in the minimum wage commission in pushing through a disproportionate increase. As a result, the minimum wage will increase starting January 1st.

In July 2022, the minimum wage was increased to €10.45 per hour. This allowed for the redistribution of nearly €2 billion to employees in 2021 and 2022 alone. Furthermore, it was agreed (unlike in previous years) that this €10.45 would also be the new benchmark for the next increase, leading to a faster rise. The union demonstrated through calculations that the negative impacts of the minimum wage, which were feared at the time of its introduction, did not materialize. Both mandatory social security contributions and wages have developed very well since the introduction of the statutory minimum wage at the beginning of 2015. This data was analyzed regionally and disseminated to the broader public through press releases in various districts. A further political focus during the reporting period was the issue of compliance with the statutory minimum wage. The 2.4 million violations of the minimum wage law reported by the German Institute for Economic Research (DIW) for 2018 alone were alarming. In this regard, the union, in collaboration with agencies X and X, reaffirmed its demands for more impartial controls, as well as for more staff in the responsible tax authority for combating undeclared work, and for a real-time and forgery-proof recording of working hours. Companies that intentionally or negligently deny their employees the statutory minimum wage face fines of up to €500,000, but these are often not applied in practice. Therefore, the union also advocated for stricter penalties. To inform employees about the amount and legal provisions, the union published a brochure entitled "What changes with the statutory minimum wage?" at the beginning of each year. At the same time, the union calculated the costs of minimum wage fraud during the first five years of its existence, revealing that a total of €14.5 billion was lost to employees and €8.1 billion to social security contributions. Five years after the introduction of the statutory minimum wage, the underlying minimum wage law was regularly evaluated. The union put forward its own proposals for the further development of the statutory minimum wage, which, in addition to demands for compliance and increases, also included the abolition of minimum wage exemptions for voluntary internships, union members under 18, and long-term unemployed individuals. At the same time, the union advocated for a transparency campaign regarding the minimum wage. This would require companies to display the current minimum wage for each employee in their employment contract and pay slip, and to publicly display it, for example, on a bulletin board, and to update it regularly. Many of these proposals were subsequently taken up by Federal Minister of Labour Hubertus Heil and introduced into the political debate in the Bundestag. On the occasion of the fifth anniversary of the introduction of the statutory minimum wage, the union organized a conference in the summer of 2019. Nearly 100 participants discussed the further development of the statutory minimum wage with prominent figures from politics, science, and business.

EU Minimum Wage
During the reporting period, the issue of a "European minimum wage" gained momentum. Following the announcement by the then-designated Commission President Ursula von der Leyen that she would address the issue, corresponding implementation steps followed. The union participated in the two social partner consultations of the European Commission on the planned directive. The union's position paper on the draft directive on adequate minimum wages in the European Union, presented by the European Commission in October 2020, was prepared and approved accordingly. On September 15, 2020, the union organized an online event on the topic of "European minimum wages: A contribution to more justice in Europe?" Joost Korte, Director-General for Employment at the European Commission, was among the speakers. As part of the German Council Presidency of the EU, the union, together with the European Trade Union Confederation, organized a workshop on this topic at the "Our Social Europe" event on September 16, 2020, where the union's position and the reasons for the need for corresponding reforms were presented. To support legal disputes, the union engaged Professor Dr. Dr. h.c. Eberhard Eichenhofer to provide a legal opinion, which was presented in April 2021.

The analysis concluded that the legal basis chosen by the European Commission is correct, and that Article 153(5) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union does not conflict with the provisions of the draft directive. On May 11, 2021, the opinion and the union's demands were presented at a union event for EU parliamentarians and other interested parties. In addition, contributions were placed in online formats and German legal journals to further disseminate these positions. Furthermore, numerous discussions were held at the political level, both nationally and at the European level, to achieve the successful implementation of the draft directive; in addition to numerous votes at the level of the X. Since the directive has not yet been adopted, the draft will continue to be actively supported by the union in order to achieve substantial improvements. Union In late 2011, the project "Union - Labor - Free Movement: Social, Fair, and Active" was established to improve the working conditions, especially for EU citizens in Germany. A network of advisory centers provides labor and social law advice in the main languages of origin. During the reporting period, it was possible to secure a statutory funding entitlement for the union for the "Future of Work" initiative. Since 2021, the union has had a legal claim to an annual sum of nearly four million euros under Article 23 of the Posted Workers Act. Due to this change, the union will continue to operate as a "union" rather than as a project. The aim is to ensure legal certainty and to maintain and further develop the quality of the union's work. The structure of the union has been expanded to 11 advisory locations. In total, nearly 9,000 people can now be advised and supported annually. The people seeking advice come mainly from Poland, Romania, Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, and Hungary, and work in various industries, such as logistics, construction, building cleaning, and the meat industry. The reasons for seeking advice include questions about wages, employment contracts, termination, and social benefits. Successfully, for example, the union secured back pay for Filipino truck drivers who were formally employed by a Polish company but working in Western Europe. A particularly problematic situation is often that of employees in home care. In the summer of 2021, the Federal Labor Court issued a landmark ruling regarding the recognition of working and standby time in the area of home care. The union closely followed the proceedings and supported the colleague who brought the case. In addition, the area of agriculture was particularly in focus during the reporting period. Seasonal workers were particularly affected by the Corona pandemic due to their accommodation and working conditions. There were cases in which the entire workforce of a company was placed in quarantine. In particular, questions about wages and accommodation costs related to quarantine played a major role in the advice provided during the Corona period. The working and living conditions in the meat industry were particularly affected by the consequences of the Corona pandemic. The union actively supported the introduction of the Occupational Safety and Health Control Act for the meat industry. In consultation with the union and the BMAS, bilingual campaign staff were hired who, together with the X, informed employees in the meat industry about the legal improvements. In addition to advice, the union reaches approximately 8,000 to 10,000 people per year through advisory events, such as in accommodations or at rest stops, and proactively informs them about their rights. The training program for advisors is also available to employees of state-funded advisory centers. In addition, during the reporting period, a joint action week was carried out with the state-funded advisory centers, the X, and the union to raise awareness of the working conditions of transport and truck drivers at Amazon and to inform employees about their rights. During 35 distribution and information events, approximately 8,000 people were reached within 4 days.

The union's close ties to affiliated unions enable it to act as a bridge between unions and workers who are only temporarily or short-term employees in Germany and who are generally not union members. By providing information, advice, and support, the union directly improves the legal protection of EU citizens in Germany. This also indirectly affects companies with abusive business practices, as they recognize, through their own experiences or media reports, that foreign employees receive effective support.

- Anja Piel, a member of the union's executive board, speaks to employees in the meat industry outside the gates of the Tönnies plant in Rheda-Wiedenbrück on March 5, 2021, as part of an information campaign by the union and X. Photo: Gewerkschaft/Thomas Range

**The Future of Work**
**Workplace Health and Safety**

Creating safe and healthy workplaces has become increasingly important in recent years, particularly due to the global pandemic caused by the coronavirus. Without the massive commitment and participation of the German union and many employee representative bodies, production could not have been maintained to the same extent. Through political intervention by the union and its affiliated unions, a legally binding SARS-CoV-2 workplace safety regulation was established, involving five state occupational safety committees. In addition, recommendations and regulations for particularly vulnerable groups of people, and statements on protective measures for vaccinated individuals, were successfully implemented. To prevent the virus from posing an even greater risk in the workplace, the union has worked with employers and the relevant authorities in the committee on biological agents, advocating for necessary protective measures, and has supported the federal government in intensive, ad hoc consultations. At the same time, the pandemic has exposed the weaknesses of prevention, not least through scandals in the meat industry and logistics. The union's pressure to strengthen state supervisory authorities proved effective in this situation, and a minimum inspection rate was enshrined in the Occupational Health and Safety Control Act. The implementation of this law is now being closely monitored, and it is hoped that it will finally mark a turning point in the enforcement of occupational health and safety regulations. In particular, the hierarchy of protective measures (technical and organizational measures before personal protective equipment) was often blatantly neglected during the pandemic, and costly workplace improvements were often replaced by protective masks.

In the committees of the Joint German Strategy for the Future of Work, a comprehensive approach to risk assessment, including the implementation of a program for handling carcinogenic substances, has been successfully implemented, despite significant resistance from employers. In 2021, this program was successfully launched. In addition to providing comments on draft laws and amendments to occupational health and safety regulations, the union and its affiliated unions involve up to 120 full-time and volunteer staff in the further development of the technical regulations of the state committees. As of August 2019, the Federal Institute for Occupational Safety and Health manages 190 technical regulations, which are in force. These include approximately 16 medical regulations, 21 workplace regulations, 36 technical regulations for workplace safety, 8 technical regulations for the ordinance on artificial optical radiation, 8 technical regulations for the ordinance on noise and vibration protection, 28 technical regulations for biological agents, and 74 technical regulations for hazardous substances. These regulations are regularly reviewed and updated to reflect the latest state of the art, in order to provide the best possible guidance for practical application. The political negotiation processes between the participating bodies (social partners, supervisory services, and science) take place in these reviews. In particular, improvements and clarifications from the union's perspective have been achieved in the following areas:

In the Committee for Workplace Safety (ASTA), despite all resistance, the width of escape doors was maintained in ASR 2.3 "Escape routes and emergency exits, escape and rescue plan," thus preventing a setback for inclusion. In ASR 3.7 "Noise," the effects of extra-aural noise were finally included, making the stress response to noise a legally binding requirement for employers.

The increasing burden on employees due to climate change, particularly in the form of heat in the workplace, has now been addressed in ASR 3.5 through the introduction of cooling phases. In the Committee for Workplace Safety (ABS), numerous accidents caused by falls and slips have been taken into account, and the TRBS "Risk of Employees Falling" has been revised in its entirety. Furthermore, the early involvement of union representatives in the ABS has led to a national position on the new EU Machinery Directive and the proposal on Artificial Intelligence, allowing for influence at the European level in the interests of employees. In the Committee for Hazardous Substances (AGS), the importance of the best possible occupational safety and health protection is constantly highlighted, not only by explosions like the one at the chemical park in Leverkusen, but also by the ongoing challenges associated with asbestos, even decades after its ban. The union's participation in the national asbestos dialogue with the ministries and the development of relevant technical regulations demonstrates the indispensable work of union experts. The union and its affiliated unions advocate for and enforce a higher level of protection, particularly for construction work on existing buildings. Therefore, the establishment and development of the exposure risk concept for carcinogenic substances was an essential component of the revision of the Hazardous Substances Ordinance. Through the ongoing focus on improved prevention, mixtures have increasingly come into focus as hazards, such as welding fumes or cutting fluids. Within the framework of the EU Chemicals Strategy of the New Green Deal, the union has advocated for the establishment of a national project group. This group shapes the interface between occupational safety and environmental protection and REACH (Registration, Evaluation, Authorisation and Restriction of Chemicals) from a national perspective, thereby improving the protection of employees in the workplace and ensuring the sustainability of these jobs within Europe. In September 2021, the new Committee for Safety and Health at Work (ASGA) was established. This committee is intended to address overarching issues of national occupational safety and coordinate the work of other committees, acting as a "primus inter pares." It is also intended to make the formation of an ad-hoc occupational safety task force unnecessary in the event of a pandemic. However, with the establishment of the ASGA, the personnel resources of national occupational safety are reaching their limits. The union and its affiliated unions will need to agree on how to enable qualified and ongoing work after the 22nd union conference. In the area of statutory accident insurance, several forward-looking discussions and reforms have been initiated and completed. The completion of the reform of occupational disease law in May 2020 was a milestone for the union and its affiliated unions. Years of efforts at various levels have led to a situation where the situation for many affected employees will improve significantly. The elimination of the obligation to refrain from certain actions will result in more people being covered by the benefits of SGB VII, and will also avoid social hardship. The introduction of a central exposure register will increase transparency in the recognition process and ultimately lead to easier recognition. Similarly, strengthening the Medical Expert Advisory Board will lead to improvements, as potential new occupational diseases can be scientifically assessed and added to the list of occupational diseases more quickly. In 2021, the list of occupational diseases was expanded to include two new diseases, thereby increasing the range of possible recognitions. These were lung cancer caused by passive smoking and hip osteoarthritis. The Corona pandemic has also presented the self-governance of the German Statutory Accident Insurance (DGUV) with numerous challenges. Several measures have been taken to adapt regulations in the areas of prevention, rehabilitation, and insurance law to the pandemic in a way that is beneficial to insured persons. To ensure safe and healthy working conditions and the "work of the future" during the pandemic, industry-specific guidelines have often been developed with the involvement of union representatives, and these have had a significant impact at the company level. In addition, the recognition of Corona as an occupational disease for employees in the healthcare and social welfare sectors has been simplified through easier evidentiary requirements.

For all other employees who become ill due to work related to COVID-19, the DGUV, thanks in part to the efforts of the trade union, has made it possible to recognize COVID-19 as a work-related accident. This means that all benefits under the German Social Code Book VII, including rehabilitation and pension payments, are available to affected employees outside the healthcare sector. The trade union has successfully advocated for expanded accident insurance coverage for mobile work. This coverage now extends to travel within one's own home and the journey from home to daycare or school and back.

The trade union conducts an annual, representative employee survey called "Gewerkschaft" (Union), which provides a comprehensive database on the quality of working conditions in Germany. Since the surveys began in 2007, the guiding principle has been that employees, as experts in their own work situations, are the best source of data for union reporting. The results are now an integral part of the political debates on labor issues within the union, government, and the public. Since the methodological development of the "Gute Arbeit" (Good Work) index in 2012, more than 63,000 employees have been surveyed using this tool. The growing database allows for specific analyses of individual industries, occupations, and employee groups. Key themes during the reporting period included interaction-based work (working with people), work intensity, the future of work, mobile work, physical strain, work and health, and the situation in elderly and nursing care.

The "Gewerkschaft" digital publication series included analyses on topics such as fixed-term employment, expectations regarding the state pension, employees with care responsibilities, the work environment, temporary work, union-dominated occupations, the shortage of skilled workers in the construction industry, home office, and crafts. The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the union was a key focus of the 2021 survey. The results show the high levels of stress experienced by employees during the pandemic, but also changes in the way work is done (digitalization, home office), which will continue to be important for employees in the future. The results of the annual survey were presented to the public by various union leaders at a federal press conference and received significant media attention. In the evaluation and use of the data, the union has cooperated with other unions, union institutions, and research institutions. This has led to further publications that underscore the importance of the union as a source of information for union reporting. In addition, a number of articles were published based on the index data, targeting a specialist audience in the fields of occupational safety and health, and work science.

The possibility of expanding the "Gewerkschaft" survey at the state level to obtain representative datasets for individual states was used 14 times in eight states (Baden-Württemberg, Berlin, Hamburg, Hesse, Saarland, Saxony, Saxony-Anhalt, Thuringia) during the reporting period. State-specific analyses of the quality of working conditions are available for these states.

The "Gewerkschaft" questionnaire is designed to be used as a tool for employee surveys in companies, administrations, and organizations.

[Image: Two sides of home office]
39% work from home
Influence on planning one's own work
Influence on
30% better work-life balance is a reason for working from home
29% unpaid work for the company
Would you like to work from home? No

[Source: Gewerkschaft, Report 2020, More than Home Office - Mobile Work in Germany.]

The union works with a network of qualified consultants who conduct employee surveys in companies and, with the participation of employees, develop concrete measures to improve working conditions based on the survey results. In the reporting period, the issue of "psychological stress" played a special role in the context of company operations. The union has supported the use of index surveys as part of the company's risk assessment by developing and providing additional questions on the topic of psychological stress.

N. Accessibility outside of working hours: Can be turned off.
E. Education and training.
E.

Education and Training: Schools / Education Policy: Early Childhood Education. The field of early childhood education, care, and upbringing has rapidly evolved, particularly since the legal entitlement to subsidized care in daycare centers and childcare services for children under three years of age. However, the increase in the number of care places has not always been accompanied by a corresponding improvement in quality, largely due to a shortage of qualified staff and a lack of quality standards. Therefore, it is urgently necessary to recruit more qualified professionals for early childhood education and to establish quality standards for daycare centers. The union has played a significant role in ensuring that the federal and state governments have taken the initiative and, in dialogue with professional associations and academia, are developing quality criteria for daycare centers. These quality criteria have largely been enshrined in the law to promote quality and improve participation in daycare centers and childcare services (KiQuTG). In addition to the law, the federal government is providing the states with 5.5 billion euros to support measures to improve the quality of daycare centers. The states can also use federal funds for contribution exemptions. The law is valid until 2022 and will be evaluated for its effectiveness. The union has consistently criticized the fact that the law, which is intended to promote the quality of daycare centers, also finances fee exemptions. Many states have taken advantage of this, which has reduced the funds available for quality improvement measures. If the law is extended beyond 2022, the union will advocate for separating these two measures. The social and family-related benefits of the fee structure, up to and including fee exemptions, must be provided by the federal and state governments within a different framework. To advance the rapidly growing system of early childhood education both quantitatively and qualitatively and to make it an attractive field of work, measures must be taken at various levels to recruit educators, improve working conditions, and enhance the status of the teaching profession. The union has compiled and contributed these recommendations in its "Recommendations for Recruiting and Retaining Qualified Staff (Educators) in Childcare Services" and has brought them into the discussion on skilled workers. With the federal program "Fachkräfteoffensive Erzieherinnen und Erzieher: Nachwuchs gewinnen, Profis binden" (Skilled Workers Offensive for Educators: Attracting New Talent, Retaining Professionals), the federal government has provided an important impetus for recruiting and retaining qualified staff. The program aims to expand practice-integrated, paid training to level 6 of the German Qualifications Framework (DQR), provide bonuses for special qualifications, and strengthen practical training opportunities. The union has explicitly welcomed and supported this contribution from the federal government, particularly regarding the requirements for training quality. The union has expressed concern that the funding for training was discontinued after one training cohort (with 2,500 students nationwide) due to a lack of funding. Originally, two training cohorts (5,000 students) were to be funded. Expansion of Full-Day Programs (Cross-Cutting Issue for Daycare Centers and Schools). To ensure that children can continue to be cared for after daycare hours and that support is available beyond school hours, schools must be expanded to offer full-day programs. This is a fundamental demand of the union. In their coalition agreement, the CDU/CSU and SPD agreed to create a legal entitlement to full-day care for primary school children. The law on the comprehensive support of children of primary school age (Ganztagsförderungsgesetz - GaFöG) established the necessary framework for this. The union explicitly supports this. In discussions and letters, the union has repeatedly urged the political representatives of the federal and state governments to stop postponing this initiative and to finally reach an agreement. In particular, the union has demanded that the federal government significantly increase its financial contribution. When expanding childcare services, the union will advocate for them to be of high quality so that they can contribute to promoting equal opportunities and the compatibility of family and work. The union is calling for nationwide, binding quality criteria for good full-day programs. School Policy. Schools have the task of decoupling educational success from social background and promoting equal opportunities.

The prolonged school closures due to the pandemic have disproportionately affected children from disadvantaged families, as well as those with special educational needs.  Increased support will be needed in the future, which schools must be able to provide. To achieve this, schools urgently need better working conditions and resources.  The union's position paper, "Schools during and after the Corona crisis: A program for greater equality of opportunity," outlines measures that can improve schools and help reduce social inequality.  Digitalization of educational institutions and education in the digital world are major challenges for the federal government and the states. This requires expanding digital infrastructure and administration, developing digital learning formats, and training teachers. To address these challenges, the federal government and the states have established the "DigitalPact for Schools" program. This program provides financial support to the states for expanding digital infrastructure in general and vocational schools. The union believes this is long overdue.  Since digitalization, media education, and the promotion of media literacy are ongoing tasks, the time-limited "DigitalPact for Schools" must be made permanent and expanded to include other areas of education.

**Education and Training**

**Lobbying and Economic Education in Schools**

For years, the union has criticized the excessive influence of employer and business associations on schools, as well as the demand for ever more economic education.  The union, along with its members, has succeeded in developing an alternative to the educational standards and demands of employer and business associations.  For example, the union has supported a scientific research project on socio-economic education, which has resulted in the development of a core curriculum for socio-economic education for secondary schools. This curriculum offers an alternative to the offerings of business associations. The union has sent the curriculum, along with a recommendation, to federal and state politicians responsible for education, as well as to relevant professional associations and all university lecturers involved in teacher training.  The curriculum offers a framework for interdisciplinary economic, political, and social education in schools.  The union and its members are making a scientifically sound contribution to the discussion on good economic education.

**Federalism and Educational Cooperation**

The state has a responsibility to ensure the right to education regardless of place of residence and to create equitable living conditions throughout the country. This includes comparable access to educational and childcare services, comparable qualifications, and quality standards.  Therefore, the union calls for closer cooperation between the federal government and the states.  The current ban on cooperation is an obstacle to this.  Since the amendment to Article 104c of the Basic Law in 2019, the federal government has been able to provide financial assistance to the states for investments of national importance, as well as for specific, time-limited expenditures of the states and municipalities (municipal associations) directly related to these investments, in order to increase the efficiency of the municipal educational infrastructure. The union explicitly supported this amendment.  To enable greater cooperation between the federal government and the states beyond financial assistance, Article 91 b, paragraph 2, of the Basic Law must be amended so that the federal government and the states can work together to ensure, rather than simply determine, the capacity of the education system.  The union's demand for an education strategy involving the federal government, the states, and social partners in an education council has been rejected by the federal government and the states.  However, the union remains committed to this demand and will continue to advocate for it in its political work and in the media.

**Vocational Training and Continuing Education**

The Corona crisis has severely impacted the vocational training market.  In the first year of the Corona pandemic (2020), the number of new vocational training contracts fell below 500,000 for the first time since German reunification. This represents a decrease of 11 percent, significantly exceeding the decline during the global financial crisis of 2008/2009 (-8.4 percent).  Furthermore, it is uncertain whether the damage to the dual vocational training system caused by the Corona crisis will be fully recovered after the pandemic.

Even during the global financial crisis of 2008/2009, the number of new apprenticeship contracts decreased significantly, by a good 100,000, in several waves. This loss could not be recovered in the 2010s, despite generally robust economic conditions. The pandemic hit an already strained apprenticeship market. In 2011, 1.98 million people (13.8 percent) had not completed vocational training, and by 2019, this number had risen to 2.16 million (14.7 percent). Among union members with a secondary school diploma, nearly one in three (34.9 percent) do not complete an apprenticeship. This has consequences for union members: they have poor prospects in the labor market. They face the risk of low-paying, short-term jobs with poor working conditions, or long periods of unemployment. The decline also affects companies. At the latest, when the first members of the baby boomer generation retire in the 2020s, companies will lack skilled workers. Digitalization and demographic change are intertwined. Digitalization increases the demand for highly skilled workers, while demographic change leads to a decline in the working-age population. This cannot be offset by immigration alone. For social and economic reasons, we cannot afford such a high rate of vocational training unemployment. The "Alliance for Vocational Training and Further Education" has brought together politics, employers, and unions to develop numerous initiatives to strengthen vocational training and to provide opportunities for union members, especially those with disadvantages (students from lower secondary schools, young people from immigrant families, or those in structurally weak unions). These include expanding support services for apprentices, introducing assisted training programs, and providing entry-level qualifications. During the Corona crisis, the German government, in consultation with the "Alliance for Vocational Training and Further Education," launched a federal program called "Securing Apprenticeship Places," with a budget of 750 million euros. This program aimed to preserve existing apprenticeship positions (through apprenticeship subsidies) and create new ones (through additional apprenticeship subsidies), avoid short-time work for apprentices (through subsidies for apprenticeship wages), and promote the takeover of apprentices by companies in the event of insolvency (through takeover bonuses). It also included support for on-the-job and cooperative training, as well as exam preparation for apprentices. These diverse measures by the "Alliance for Vocational Training and Further Education" were important, but they were not enough to reduce the high rate of vocational training unemployment. The union and its member unions are therefore advocating for a contribution-financed apprenticeship guarantee, modeled after the Austrian system. In strengthening vocational education as a whole, the union and its member unions have not only focused on the apprenticeship market, but also on the quality and attractiveness of the system. In the "Inquiry Commission on Vocational Education in the Digital World of Work," established by the German Bundestag, demands were made for a pact for vocational schools, better qualification of in-company training staff, the digital development of the examination system, better framework conditions for training in the health, education, and social work sectors, and minimum standards for dual studies. The union experts Elke Hannack (union), Francesco Grioli (X), Angela Kennecke (X), Ute Kittel, and Uta Kupfer (both X) ensured that the report of the Inquiry Commission has the potential to significantly influence vocational education policy in the coming years (Bundestag printed paper 19/30950). Modernization of vocational education also played an important role in apprenticeship occupations.

[Chart showing the number of new apprenticeship contracts from 2007-2021, in absolute numbers.]

[Chart showing the percentage of young adults without vocational training, by age group.]

The number of people without vocational training continues to increase year after year. A contribution-financed apprenticeship guarantee for young people can help to reverse this trend. [Graphic from einblick/03.11.2021.] Source: Federal Institute for Vocational Education, BiBB Data Report 2021.

Vocational Training and Qualification 82

Reducing vocational training unemployment. The union and its member unions are therefore advocating for a contribution-financed apprenticeship guarantee, modeled after the Austrian system. In strengthening vocational education as a whole, the union and its member unions have not only focused on the apprenticeship market, but also on the quality and attractiveness of the system. In the "Inquiry Commission on Vocational Education in the Digital World of Work," established by the German Bundestag, demands were made for a pact for vocational schools, better qualification of in-company training staff, the digital development of the examination system, better framework conditions for training in the health, education, and social work sectors, and minimum standards for dual studies. The union experts Elke Hannack (union), Francesco Grioli (X), Angela Kennecke (X), Ute Kittel, and Uta Kupfer (both X) ensured that the report of the Inquiry Commission has the potential to significantly influence vocational education policy in the coming years (Bundestag printed paper 19/30950). Modernization of vocational education also played an important role in apprenticeship occupations.

Since 2021, all training regulations have included modernized and new, mandatory minimum requirements for the areas of "organization of the training company, vocational training, and labor and collective bargaining law," "occupational safety and health," "environmental protection and sustainability," and "digitalized trade unions." These four standard vocational training areas apply to all training occupations that came into effect on August 1, 2021, and have been developed under the significant influence of trade unions. The trade union and its affiliated unions have also actively participated in the legislative process for the amendment of the Vocational Training Act (BBiG). Compared to the original plans of the Ministry of Education regarding the minimum training remuneration, there have been important improvements, although the target set by the trade union has not been fully achieved. However, there has been a significant increase in the minimum training remuneration (MiAV) for trainees in the second, third, and fourth years of training. For the first time, the appropriateness of the training remuneration is regulated by law. In addition to the minimum training remuneration, which is perhaps the most well-known element of the reform, the rights of trainees have also been strengthened. For example, the law stipulates that all trainees must be given time off for vocational school and for written exams. This means that even full-age trainees can no longer be required to come to work before or after a long day at vocational school. This strengthens the vocational school as a learning environment and makes training in companies and schools more attractive for trainees. An important step forward was the inclusion of textbooks in the scope of materials allowed for training. This means that these costs are no longer borne by the trainees. In addition, there is a legally guaranteed time off for volunteer examiners. This will at least make it easier to ensure the generational change in the volunteer examiner system, as many examiners have previously had difficulty obtaining time off from their employers for their volunteer work. With regard to dual studies, the trade union had called for the operational phases of the practice-integrated dual studies to be included in the scope of the BBiG. Unfortunately, this step has not been implemented. However, a joint process involving the federal government, the states, and social partners is intended to further address this issue. This has been formulated in a resolution by the German Bundestag. Our goal remains to ensure that all dual studies students, like apprentices, benefit from the quality standards and protection rights of the Vocational Training Act in the company. The Aufstiegs-BAföG (AFBG), or advanced vocational training financial aid, is the most important instrument for promoting vocational further education. Employees have increasing educational needs and want to continue their education. To achieve this, they need solid and attractive financial support. With the fourth amendment to the AFBG, long-standing demands of the trade union, such as expanding the maintenance allowance to full funding for education and qualification, were addressed and implemented. This has expanded the funding offer to include every vocational further education level provided for in the BBiG. The amount of financial support has also been significantly increased and improved. The trade union and organizations X, X, X, and X have been actively involved in the National Further Education Strategy (NWS), which was agreed in the coalition agreement. The strategy paper on the NWS, adopted in 2019, provided many good starting points, which were ultimately due to the coordinated, cross-departmental cooperation between the trade union and the participating unions. Even though little progress has been made on the major issues of further education, some significant progress has been achieved in many individual areas. For example, a basic right to funding for vocational further education (vocational qualification) has been achieved. Projects on further education mentors from organizations X, X, and X, as well as the chemical industry social partners, are being funded by the Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) to promote the outreach and advice of employees on further education. Well-functioning trade union projects within the framework of the ESF Social Partnership Guidelines and the Alpha Decade (projects Mento and BasisKomPlus) have been secured. The funding guideline for the ESF federal program "Securing Skilled Workers: Further Education and Promoting Equality" was intended to support the efforts of social partners and companies to secure skilled workers and adapt to demographic change. More than 45,000 employees in 4,800 companies have been supported through 170 projects.

The program, which the union jointly manages with the BMAS (Federal Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs) and the BDA (Confederation of German Employers' Associations), is an important foundation for the National Further Education Strategy. Its practical examples for improving further education and strengthening professional skills are valuable. Every year, the union organizes a "Day of Vocational Education." These events provide a forum for representatives from education and training bodies to exchange information on current developments and network. The union also uses this event format to discuss important issues and develop positions on developments in vocational education. The "Day of Vocational Education" has become a regular event in the union's calendar, attracting approximately 200 participants each time.

**Democratic and Social Higher Education**

In the German academic system, precarious employment, uncertain prospects, and high levels of unpaid overtime have been commonplace for years. In 2016, the amendment to the temporary employment law in science, known as the Wissenschaftszeitvertragsgesetz (Science Contract Law), did not achieve the hoped-for success in curbing, especially, short-term contracts. To support the union's commitment to good work in academia with current data, the union launched the "Union Project." The employee survey, also conducted by the union, revealed a high level of pressure. Employees at German universities generally rate their working conditions worse than comparable groups in the public sector. The survey was supplemented by a secondary analysis of official statistics and additional data, which were evaluated to address the pressing issues surrounding working conditions in academia. The union, together with its members, is working to evaluate the amended Science Contract Law with the aim of enforcing fair working and employment conditions. This includes more permanent positions for permanent tasks, predictable career development opportunities, and more full-time positions in academia. The union is urging a further amendment to the law.

**Development of Students and Funded Students 2010-2020**

[Chart showing the number of students, total and funded, from 2010 to 2020. The chart shows a general increase in total students, with a peak around 2015, followed by a slight decline. The number of funded students also increased, but at a slower rate.]

**Education and Qualification**

The proportion of people benefiting from BAföG (Federal Education Assistance Act) has been declining for years and has reached a historic low. The law no longer adequately fulfills its mandate to ensure equal opportunities in access to quality education. The union has closely followed the process surrounding the 26th amendment to the BAföG law. The 26th amendment to the BAföG law increased the allowances and funding rates, as well as the allowance for living expenses. In addition, an increased subsidy for students over 30 for health and nursing insurance was achieved. The union's demand to abolish the age limits could not be implemented during the amendment process. Furthermore, the promised turnaround in the proportion of funded students was not achieved. The issue of BAföG was a key focus throughout the legislative period, including in the context of discussions on measures to mitigate the consequences of the Corona pandemic, and culminated in a BAföG structural reform concept developed by the union for the 50th anniversary of BAföG on September 1, 2021 - shortly before the federal election.

The union has successfully raised the issue of permeability within the education system through a corresponding recommendation from the BIBB (Federal Institute for Vocational Education and Training) Main Committee on permeability between vocational and higher education. This included demands for a subject-independent access to higher education for professionally qualified individuals with at least three years of training, as well as for better conditions for part-time study programs.

**F. Social Security and Labor Market**

**Labor Market Policy and Short-Time Work**

The labor market has been subject to strong influences in the past four years.

Firstly, there was pressure on companies to address societal developments and to undergo a transformation towards a more digital and environmentally friendly union. Secondly, the labor market was severely impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic and the slowdown in public and economic life during the pandemic response. As a result, the number of unemployed people increased by half a million in 2020 compared to the previous year, reaching 2.7 million. In April 2020, approximately 6 million employees were on short-time work, a record high. The number of people relying on basic income support (Hartz IV) increased by approximately 300,000 in early 2020, reaching 4 million. Despite this difficult crisis, the union successfully influenced the labor market policies of the German government. In particular, important demands of the union were implemented regarding short-time work, the extended duration of unemployment benefits (I), and easier access to basic income support. In 2021, the labor market recovered. However, the long-term unemployment rate, as is typical during crises, increased and became entrenched due to the crisis. Short-time work as an effective crisis instrument. Short-time work proved to be an effective crisis instrument, as it did during the financial and economic crisis of 2008/2009, saving millions of jobs. During the COVID-19 crisis, the existing regulations on short-time work were adapted to the current needs of the labor market from early 2020. This was necessary because entire industries experienced massive production disruptions within a few days. The German government largely adopted the union's proposals when expanding the regulations on short-time work. The threshold for the number of employees who must be affected by production disruptions in order to be eligible for short-time work was lowered from 30% to 10%. The amount of short-time work benefits was increased from the previous 60% or 67% for households with children to 70% or 77% from the 4th month of receipt, and to 80% or 87% from the 7th month of receipt, provided that 50% of the net wage is lost. In addition, it was possible to include employees on temporary contracts in short-time work and to link short-time work with expanded training opportunities. This point, in particular, was and is an important goal of the union, even in the context of the union's transformation, and will continue to be pursued by the union after the COVID-19 pandemic. The union ensured that the regulations on short-time work were implemented in the interests of employees. However, further proposals from the union, such as the introduction of a minimum short-time work benefit, the extension of the regulations on supplementing short-time work benefits, and the extension of the duration of benefits, were not implemented. At the beginning of the pandemic, the union created extensive informational materials that comprehensively explained and clarified the regulations and were updated with each legislative change. This provided valuable assistance to many works councils and union representatives, especially in the early stages of the COVID-19 crisis. Social security and the labor market. Further education and transformation. In addition to the serious consequences of the pandemic, a central challenge was the issue of further education, which was at the forefront of labor market policy. The union was actively involved in the national further education strategy of the German government and achieved measurable successes. A key first milestone was the Qualification Opportunities Act to support structural change, which has been in force since January 2019. This made further education funding for employees independent of education, age, and company size, making it more accessible. In addition, the Federal Employment Agency (BA) strengthened the training and qualification advice for employees and employers, promoted qualification measures for the unemployed, expanded the scope of unemployment insurance, and reduced contributions to unemployment insurance. In May 2020, the "Future of Work" Act (Law to promote vocational training in structural change and to further develop training funding) was passed. It provides answers to the challenges that the structural change towards a low-emission and digital economy poses for the union. The skills and competencies of employees must be adapted in order to prepare people in Germany for the jobs of tomorrow.

To this end, the law further developed the instruments for labor market policy. In support of these legal innovations, the National Further Education Strategy initiated additional support initiatives, including the development of a central online portal for professional development, further education mentoring programs from IG Metall, X, X, and X, and the promotion of further education networks and regional collaborations to provide training for employees, particularly in small and medium-sized enterprises. Due to these many changes, the union has created a guide for works councils and employee representatives on the topic of promoting employee training and has advertised it through various channels. In addition, the union, the BDA (Confederation of German Employers' Associations), and the BA (Federal Employment Agency) are jointly promoting greater efforts in further education. However, despite the generally positive developments in statutory funding opportunities, the implementation still leaves much to be desired. According to the IAB (Institute for Employment Research), only one in ten companies used short-time work for qualification purposes, and despite a slight increase, only 6.2 percent of the target group in employment agencies and 2.4 percent of the target group in job centers received support for further education in 2019, followed by an expected decline during the pandemic. Basic income support for job seekers ("Hartz IV") In the spring of 2019, the union presented a concept for replacing the existing Hartz IV system with a new basic income system. The benefits of this new basic income should effectively protect against poverty and be provided in a citizen-friendly manner. The eligibility requirements should be based on the principle of "good work," and integration goals and steps should be agreed upon with the recipients. The union rejects sanctions that infringe on the minimum standard of living. The Federal Constitutional Court (BVerfG) also ruled in November 2019 that unemployment benefits could be reduced by a maximum of 30 percent in cases of violations. The union was able to ensure that the maximum 30 percent reduction was consistently applied in practice, and that stricter sanction rules for young adults were also suspended. However, the transitional regulations have so far only been codified in a circular from the Federal Employment Agency, and a legal revision based on the ruling is still pending. In addition to the issue of the appropriateness of sanctions, the amount of the basic allowance is also an important point that the union is addressing. In several joint activities within the "Alliance for a dignified minimum income," the union has been able to demonstrate that the basic allowances are politically motivated and set too low. These activities have received positive press coverage. The union renewed its criticism on the occasion of the regular, fundamental re-evaluation of the allowances in the fall of 2020 and called for a new calculation system. While the "abolition" of Hartz IV could not yet be implemented under the conditions of a grand coalition, the "traffic light" coalition has agreed in its coalition agreement to replace Hartz IV with a citizen's allowance. The key points of this citizen's allowance largely correspond to the demands that the union has put forward in the debate, with the exception of the amount of the benefits. During the Corona pandemic, the union was able to achieve substantial, material improvements for groups of people who were otherwise not covered at all (e.g., self-employed individuals) or not sufficiently covered (e.g., low-wage earners on short-time work). The regulations introduced in the spring of 2019 for easier access to basic income support were based on proposals from the union, which the legislature implemented almost verbatim: Housing costs were temporarily fully reimbursed in their actual amount, and the asset check was effectively suspended. During the reporting period, the union and its member unions have continued to ensure basic funding for the coordination center for union unemployment groups. The union networks and supports local unemployment groups, provides information on social law, and organizes political action days. The work of the union also helps to ensure that unemployed colleagues remain members of the union during the period of unemployment.

Social Security and the Labor Market

Number of people participating in the "Social Labor Market" program (according to § 8, paragraph 16i of the German Social Code Book II):
50,000
37,500
25,000
12,500
January 2019
July 2019
January 2020
July 2020
January 2021

Source: Own presentation based on data from the Federal Employment Agency: Labor market policy instruments (time series of monthly figures), reporting month June 2021.

Long-term unemployment / Social Labor Market

Preventing unemployment and reducing existing long-term unemployment are important labor market policy goals of the union. During the reporting period, a significant success was achieved: Following the union's persistent advocacy for publicly funded employment for the unemployed, the German government introduced a "Social Labor Market" program in 2019. Wage subsidies are used to create jobs for the long-term unemployed, with a duration of up to five years, accompanied by support and training opportunities. In the summer of 2021, the union presented a comprehensive interim analysis of the experiences with the social labor market, along with specific demands for its permanent implementation and further development. In addition, the union also called for a major initiative to promote further education and training for the long-term unemployed. While a breakthrough in the statutory funding instruments is still pending, the awareness of the need for improved training support has significantly increased among political actors.

Poverty and Child Poverty

During the reporting period, the union has been increasingly involved in the fight against poverty, with a particular focus on overcoming child poverty. As in the past, the union co-organized and prepared a major anti-poverty conference in 2019, with 500 participants, this time jointly with the Paritätischer Wohlfahrtsverband and the National Conference on Poverty. The conference, held under the motto "Germany: A Construction Site. Let's Tackle It Together!" on April 10/11, 2019, in Berlin, featured numerous and prominent solutions proposed by the union to combat poverty. For many months, the union critically reviewed the sixth report on poverty and wealth by the German government in the so-called advisory group, providing detailed comments and presenting its own well-founded proposals for combating poverty. With regard to financial benefits for children, the German government has at least partially implemented the union's demands, resulting in noticeable improvements for low-income families with children. For example, in 2019, the "Strong Families Act" eliminated the co-payments for school and daycare meals and for student transportation as part of the education and participation package, and increased the benefits for school materials by 50 percent. In addition, the child benefit was increased and access was significantly simplified, especially for single parents. These improvements represent tangible assistance for low-income families, although a breakthrough in the fight against child poverty has not yet been achieved.

Starting in the spring of 2020, the union, together with many social and welfare organizations, called for compensation for the additional burdens on low-income households resulting from the loss of services, additional expenses, and price increases due to the coronavirus pandemic. At least partial successes were achieved in this area. The German government provided a child bonus, a one-time special payment for adults receiving basic income support, and a child leisure bonus. The union also further developed its program for financial benefits for families and presented a detailed and well-calculated concept for a child basic income. This concept is designed to benefit employees with children. The aim is to lift low-income individuals out of the Hartz IV system, and to provide material support to low-income individuals whose income is above the Hartz IV level. This programmatic development has led to the union being perceived as a competent and relevant actor in an important future issue. In several public awareness campaigns, the union, together with other organizations, highlighted the urgency of combating child poverty and called for the introduction of a child basic income - most recently in the joint appeal "A Basic Income for All Children - Now!" in August 2021.

The union contributed to shifting the discourse in favor of a child basic income, and the SPD, the Greens, and the FDP agreed to introduce a child basic income in their coalition agreement.

**Participation of People with Disabilities**

2020 marked the 100th anniversary of the law on the rights of people with severe disabilities. The law on the employment of people with severe disabilities came into force for the first time on April 6, 1920. The union planned to celebrate this milestone with a large event. However, due to the pandemic, the event had to be canceled and was later held as a livestream in 2021 to mark the 101st anniversary, with over 400 participants.

In January 2021, the union published its demands for the further development of the company integration management (BEM) system. In light of the COVID-19 pandemic and the numerous cases of long-term health consequences, the union called for the legal regulations governing BEM to be expanded. The union argued that every employee who becomes long-term sick should have the opportunity to keep their job. However, the grand coalition only presented a minimal consensus on the further development of BEM in the Participation Enhancement Act of 2021.

Another key focus was the fight against poverty among people with disabilities. The risk of poverty is disproportionately high for people with disabilities, especially those of working age. The union has drawn attention to this issue and called for: "Disability should no longer lead to poverty!" The union is calling for a flat-rate additional allowance for people with disabilities in basic income and, in the long term, a participation allowance that is scaled according to the degree of disability and paid in addition to wages and social benefits as compensation for disadvantages.

Furthermore, the reform of the regulations on medical assessments for disability benefits was on the political agenda. The planned changes proposed by the Federal Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs (BMAS) in 2018 triggered widespread and vocal protests from unions, representatives of people with severe disabilities, and disability organizations. After a lengthy process, it was possible to prevent a reform and the planned deterioration for those affected in the recognition of a degree of disability in 2020.

**Labor and Social Law**

**Collective Bargaining**

To improve the working conditions of posted workers, the European Union has revised the EU Posted Workers Directive, which member states were required to implement in their national laws by July 30, 2020. The union was clear that the fundamental improvements in the new directive must also apply to posted workers. The union developed a position paper and further demands for the implementation of the revised Posted Workers Directive and presented them to the responsible members of the Bundestag and the Federal Ministry of Labor. Key points included the definition of remuneration, the distinction between posting allowances, adequate accommodation conditions, and the extended application of generally binding and generally effective collective bargaining agreements. In addition, the union was represented on the European Commission's Expert Committee on Posting Issues and coordinated its implementation activities with other European trade union confederations within the framework of the Posting Working Group.

In the context of implementing the revised Posted Workers Directive, the union also raised the issue of the inadequate implementation of the enforcement directive on the Posted Workers Directive, not least through the union's contribution to the implementation report of the directive published by the European Commission. This was followed by public relations work by the union on the topic of implementing the Posted Workers Directive.

**Social Security and Labor Market**

The German government remained largely behind the possibilities of the Posted Workers Directive in the national implementation, including in the extended application of collective bargaining agreements. Therefore, only nationwide and not regional collective bargaining agreements can be declared generally binding. The union, together with its member unions, supported the reform of Section 4a of the Collective Bargaining Act (TVG), which came into force on January 1, 2019. The reform was intended to implement the judgment of the Federal Constitutional Court of summer 2017, in which the Federal Constitutional Court ruled that Section 4a of the TVG was not fully compatible with the constitution, because it does not guarantee that the interests of minority unions are adequately taken into account in cases of displacement of collective bargaining agreements.

The union also critically monitored the legislative process. This helped prevent overly restrictive regulations that would have undermined the autonomy of the union's collective bargaining rights from being incorporated into the new legislation. As part of a so-called "third-party intervention," the union also advocated for the recognition of a civil servant strike right before the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR), submitting relevant statements. In 2019, the union actively campaigned for the introduction of a civil servant strike right in Germany. Unfortunately, the Federal Constitutional Court (BVerfG) ruled against this in June 2018, also rejecting the concept of a functionally-based civil servant strike right in Germany. The union strongly criticized the decisions of the Federal Constitutional Court (BVerfGE) and published various materials on the subject. As part of a so-called "third-party intervention," the union continued to advocate for the recognition of a civil servant strike right before the ECtHR, submitting relevant statements.

**Labor Law:**
*   **Further Development of Part-Time Employment Law (Introduction of "Bridging" Part-Time Employment):** In 2018, the union monitored the legislative process for the reform of part-time employment law, which was completed with the implementation of the changes on January 1, 2019. The union was able to achieve its demand for a legally protected right to limited-term part-time employment, although with restrictions due to opposition from the EPP group. For example, this right is only available to employees at companies with more than 45 employees, and is limited to "one in fifteen" employees at companies with up to 200 employees, which the union criticized. For part-time employees who want to increase their working hours, it was possible to ease the burden of proof, making it easier for these individuals to realize their request for increased hours if there are available positions. While the union was unable to abolish the practice of "on-call" work, the specification of the regulations for "on-call" work in Section 12 of the Part-Time Work Act (TzBfG) provided more legal certainty for employees working "on-call." Overall, the union welcomed the reform as a first step in the right direction, but continues to advocate for "bridging" part-time employment for all employees without thresholds, a genuine legal right to increase working hours for all part-time employees, and the abolition of "on-call" work. The union has made it clear in publications, radio broadcasts, and press articles that the reform was not sufficient, as many employees still do not benefit from the new "bridging" part-time employment due to existing thresholds.

*   **Discussions on the Need for Reform in Working Time Law:** During the reporting period, the need for reform in working time law was a focus of the union's activities. Under the pretext of new needs for the digital union, employer associations, as well as some federal states and parliamentary groups in the Bundestag, called for greater flexibility in the existing framework of working time law, and ultimately, a reduction in existing protection standards. The focus of these demands was on abandoning the daily maximum working hours in favor of a weekly consideration of maximum working hours, as well as shortening or weakening the uninterrupted rest period. Several federal states led by the EPP (North Rhine-Westphalia in January 2019 and Bavaria in September 2019) introduced initiatives in the Bundesrat (the upper house of parliament) with corresponding proposals, as did some opposition groups (hearings held in response to proposals from the FDP in the Bundestag). The union worked intensively to ensure that these initiatives from the federal states did not receive a majority in the Bundesrat. It also advocated in the Bundestag and before the federal government to ensure that corresponding proposed amendments were not taken up politically. As a result, a weakening of the Working Time Act was prevented during the 2017-2021 legislative period.

*   **Corona Crisis and Amendments to the Working Time Act:** In response to the Corona crisis and the justification of impending personnel shortages in the healthcare system and in numerous other industries, the federal government temporarily eased the Working Time Act in the spring of 2020 for so-called "systemically relevant" professions, through the SARS-CoV-2 Occupational Safety and Health Ordinance (Corona-ArbSchV), which, among other things, allowed daily working hours of twelve hours, weekly working hours of up to 60 hours, and more if necessary, as well as a reduction in rest periods. This regulation was introduced for a limited time (from April 10, 2020 to June 30, 2020; with effects until July 31, 2020).

The union and its affiliated unions have consistently criticized the regulation from the outset, arguing that it represents a fundamentally flawed approach to crisis management and fails to consider the perspective of employees. The union successfully advocated for the regulation to be terminated after its expiration date. A decision by the European Court of Justice on May 14, 2019 (Case C-55/18) sparked a debate about the need for a legal framework requiring employers to record working hours. The union actively participated in the discussions surrounding the implications of this decision (including in several hearings on related proposals from the FDP, The Left party, and the Alliance 90/The Greens), calling for the principles of the decision to be enshrined in a separate law, and supporting this demand with a legal opinion. While this demand could not be implemented, it is supported by the SPD, The Left, and Alliance 90/The Greens, and has been included in their election programs for the 2021 federal elections. The provision in the coalition agreement of the "traffic light" coalition regarding the implementation of the ECJ ruling on working time recording, framed as a mere review task, is considered wholly inadequate from the union's perspective.

**Protection Against Dismissal for High Earners**

In 2018 and 2019, the union strongly opposed plans by the governing parties to weaken protection against dismissal for high earners. Under the pretext of increasing the attractiveness of the Frankfurt banking center for financial institutions from Great Britain affected by Brexit, the governing parties agreed in the coalition agreement to exempt so-called "risk-bearing" employees, as defined in Section 2, Paragraph 8 of the Institute Compensation Ordinance, whose annual regular basic salary exceeds three times the contribution assessment limit (BBG), from the protection of the dismissal protection law and to treat them as senior executives. This law, despite intense lobbying by the union, was passed in the spring of 2019 and came into effect in April 2019.

**Company Pension Schemes**

During the reporting period, the union focused on the practical implementation of the various elements of the reform package to strengthen company pension schemes (the Company Pension Strengthening Act), particularly the need to adapt existing collective bargaining agreements on wage conversion, but also on the feasibility of certain provisions of the law, such as the tax incentives for employer-funded company pension schemes. The union also supported the implementation of the EU directive on the activities and supervision of company pension institutions (so-called "EBA"), with the aim of emphasizing the social purpose of these institutions. The union advocated for the introduction of a mandatory insolvency insurance requirement for company pensions and annuities, which are managed through pension funds. This was prompted by the legislative process initiated by the Federal Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs (BMAS) in November 2019 to amend the Company Pension Act. The BMAS continued work on this law at the beginning of the Corona crisis in March 2020, as part of the "7th SGB IV Amendment Act" package. In numerous discussions with politicians, representatives of the BMAS, and during the expert hearing in the Bundestag – particularly in the context of the economic and financial crisis threatened by Corona – the union advocated for insolvency insurance for all company pensions and opposed reform plans that would exempt life insurers and their pension funds from the insolvency insurance requirement. Due to resistance from the insurance industry and employers, these demands could not be implemented. In the same legislative process, the union called for a harmonization of the jurisdiction for legal disputes related to company pensions and, with the support of the judges of the Federal Labor Court, proposed a specific regulatory proposal, which also could not be implemented.

**EU Labor Law and Implementation in German Law**

During the reporting period, the union monitored several legislative processes at the EU level regarding the implementation of EU regulations into German law. For example, the union was successfully involved in the implementation of the EU directive on the protection of trade secrets, adopted in 2016.

It was possible to achieve an exception to the strict rules of data protection for the exchange of information and knowledge in collective and individual employment relationships. The union, together with organization X, accompanied the legislative processes for the adoption of EU-wide rules on the protection of whistleblowers (EU Whistleblower Directive) and the EU-wide rules on the protection of employees through transparent and reliable working conditions, including a requirement for employers to document working conditions (EU Working Conditions Directive). The union advocated for the implementation of both directives through coherent protective rules in German law.

In the area of whistleblower protection, a legal opinion was obtained to determine the regulatory needs. While the implementation of both directives was planned during the reporting period, it has been postponed by the federal government. In particular, the comprehensive protection approach called for by the union and planned by the Federal Ministry of Justice and Consumer Protection (BMJV) in the EU Whistleblower Directive failed due to resistance from within the EU. The union also accompanied the processes for the adoption of the directive on preventive restructuring frameworks, the second chance, and measures to promote restructuring, insolvency, and debt relief proceedings, as well as the amendment of the directive for pre-insolvency restructuring. This directive, which aims to ensure a uniform EU approach to effective national restructuring frameworks for viable companies facing financial difficulties, also affects the interests of employees in such crisis-ridden or insolvency-threatened companies. It was adopted by the European Council on June 20, 2019, after agreement in the trilogue in December 2018.

**Labor Law in the Corona Crisis**

From March 2020 to the end of the 2021 legislative period, the impact of measures to contain the spread of Corona dominated developments in labor law. New entitlements were created for employees who, as parents or caregivers, were affected by the closure of daycare centers, schools, and childcare facilities. The union advocated for a quick and unbureaucratic solution for the affected parents from the beginning of the crisis and actively supported – including with its own proposal for a so-called "parental emergency aid" – the legislative processes for the introduction of a new exemption regulation in the Infection Protection Act and a further exemption regulation through the expansion of the rules for so-called "child sickness benefit."

Working from home played a significant role in the fight against the pandemic. The union advocated that employers be obligated to offer the possibility of working from home and that employees be granted a legal claim to it. These demands were partially met: the obligation for employers to offer a home office workplace was included in the SARS-CoV-2 Occupational Safety and Health Ordinance and subsequently transferred to the so-called "federal emergency brake." However, this regulation expired on June 30, 2021, but was re-introduced on November 23, 2021, through an amendment to the Infection Protection Act. A permanent solution in the form of the "Mobile Work Act," which was proposed by the Federal Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs (BMAS) in the autumn of 2020, failed due to resistance within the EU.

Regarding the question of whether the right to paid vacation can be reduced due to short-time work, the union adopted a position paper in June 2020 with the aim of providing the union with arguments to support its negotiations with employers and, through dissemination in specialist circles, to influence the opinion of representatives of the judiciary. In close coordination with the specialist departments of the member unions, the union continuously assessed the impact of the anti-Corona measures on labor law and working conditions. Several online labor law guides in the form of FAQs were developed, covering topics such as "Corona and Labor Law," "Corona and Vacation," "Corona and Childcare," "Corona and Working Hours," "Corona-Tracing App and Labor Law," "Vaccination and Testing," as well as information on the obligation to disclose vaccination status, but also on dealing with continued wage payments in the event of quarantine for unvaccinated individuals, and on the 3G rules in the employment relationship.

On March 24, 2021, the union held a conference on the labor and social law consequences of the Corona crisis for employed individuals. The event was opened by union board member Anja Piel, who pointed out that the pandemic had affected different industries and employees in different ways.

In addition to topics related to the impact of the Corona pandemic on the handling of employee data and current issues in labor law, there were also two panel discussions on social law (conference report).

Social security and the labor market:
Electronic proof of incapacity to work.
At the urging of the trade union and in joint letters with the BDA (Confederation of German Employers' Associations), the German government was dissuaded during the legislative process from introducing the electronic proof of incapacity to work two years earlier than originally planned through a rushed and hasty action. Technical problems in transmitting the certificates, also due to a lack of equipment for doctors, would have disadvantaged employees.

Employee data protection:
Draft of a standalone employee data protection law.
The improvements achieved by the trade union for employee data protection after the entry into force of the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) in 2016 were important, but not sufficient. While the coalition agreement for the 2017-2021 legislative period stipulated that the CDU/CSU and SPD should examine the creation of a standalone law on employee data protection, this mandate was not addressed until the final phase of the legislative period. As a result, the interdisciplinary advisory board, composed of experts from academia and practice, was only able to present its findings shortly before the elections. The trade union took the opportunity to nominate a legal scholar to this BMAS (Federal Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs) expert advisory board. In early November 2020, the trade union participated in a hearing as part of a meeting of the expert group. Nevertheless, the trade union has advocated for a standalone employee data protection law in publications and statements, particularly in its participation in the evaluation of the BDSG (Federal Data Protection Act). The trade union and its affiliated unions have clearly stated why the implementation of this initiative is necessary. In addition, in October 2021, the trade union, following 2009 and 2013, once again took the initiative and presented a draft law for a standalone employee data protection law, developed with the support of experts and in collaboration with the trade union.

Social security and the labor market:
Proposal for a regulation on the protection of privacy in the electronic communications sector (e-Privacy Regulation).
After the EU Commission presented the proposal for the e-Privacy Regulation in January 2017, the EU Council, under the Portuguese Council presidency, reached an agreement on a proposal for the e-Privacy Regulation in February 2021. The e-Privacy Regulation focuses on the specific protection of privacy and the protection of personal data in electronic communications. While these protection goals overlap in many areas, the e-Privacy Regulation only regulates a specific area where personal data should be protected. Following the agreement in the EU Council, the first trilogue negotiations took place on May 20, 2021, where the draft was generally welcomed, although some proposed amendments were made. In the second trilogue negotiation on November 18, 2021, further potential amendments were discussed.

Draft law for a contract law to ratify the Revised European Social Charter (RESC) of May 3, 1996.
The German government signed the RESC in June 2007 but has not yet ratified it. The RESC of 1996 updated the most important social fundamental rights (such as the right to strike and protection against dismissal) of the European Social Charter (ESC) of 1961 and now seeks to incorporate them into German law. The trade union submitted extensive comments on the draft law presented by the BMAS in February 2020, and, among other things, demanded that no reservations be made to the ratification or that any restrictive interpretative declarations be issued (as France had done). Instead of addressing the trade union's criticisms, the German government, with a cabinet decision on May 6, 2020, even introduced further deteriorations (including a reservation regarding Article 7, which concerns child labor).

The German government has not followed the ratification requirements highlighted by the trade union regarding the right to protection against dismissal, the right to information and consultation, the right to participate in the determination and improvement of working conditions and the work environment, and the recognition of the "collective complaint protocol." The contract law came into force on December 31, 2020.

Insolvency law:
[Text continues, but is incomplete.]

In January 2021, the law for the further development of restructuring and insolvency law (SaninsFoG) came into force. This law aims to implement the Restructuring and Insolvency Directive, taking into account the consequences of an evaluation study on the existing restructuring law following the 2012 reform of the ESUG (law to further facilitate the restructuring of companies). Within this restructuring process, it is now possible to implement restructuring measures that affect the rights of creditors before the insolvency proceedings begin. The rights of employees are excluded from this. At the same time, following explicit criticism from the trade union and its affiliated unions regarding the draft bill, the possibility of establishing a creditors' committee has been created. The provision allowing non-affected creditors (including employees) to be represented on the committee ensures the participation of employees in the pre-insolvency stabilization and restructuring process.

**Implementation of the Collective Redress Directive into National Law**

In November 2020, the EU adopted a directive on collective redress to protect the collective interests of consumers. This directive essentially provides for the possibility of collective lawsuits against companies that violate EU regulations designed to protect consumers, with the aim of obtaining injunctions or remedies such as compensation, repairs, or contract termination. In addition to general consumer law, the scope of collective redress also extends to violations by companies in areas such as data protection, financial services, travel and tourism, energy, telecommunications, the environment and health, and the rights of air and rail travelers. Member states must implement the provisions of the directive into national law by December 25, 2022. The trade union is monitoring the national implementation processes and will advocate for a collective redress right for trade unions and an extension of the collective redress right to the field of labor law.

**Social Law**

The reform of social compensation law, agreed upon in the coalition agreement between the CDU/CSU and SPD, and the subsequent consolidation into a social law (SGB XIV), has been welcomed and supported by the trade union. This law has significantly improved the regulations for victims of violence, including victims of terrorism, victims of the effects of war, those affected by events related to civilian service, and those affected by vaccinations, as well as their relatives and dependents.

**Electronic Legal Proceedings**

Since 2016, the trade union, together with its affiliated unions and the BDA (Confederation of German Employers' Associations), has been involved in the procedural rules for labor and social law and has contributed to the legislative process through statements and targeted letters to the relevant ministries. The government draft law, presented in February 2021, for the expansion of electronic legal proceedings meets the demands made by the trade union and its affiliated unions for a further secure method of transmission and its requirements for use. The law provides for sufficient transitional periods for the passive obligation to use (readiness to receive electronic documents from the courts) until January 1, 2024, and for the active obligation to use (sending electronic documents to the courts) until January 1, 2026. Furthermore, the trade union can now decide, based on its own needs, whether it wants to organize electronic legal proceedings as an organization with one or more mailboxes.

**Coordination of Social Security Systems**

Since 2014, the trade union, together with its affiliated unions, has been actively involved in the discussions on the "Workers' Confederation Agreement." The core issue is the social security coverage of employees working abroad, for short-term assignments and projects (A1 certificate). The trade union and its affiliated unions have a strong interest in preventing social security fraud at the expense of employees. After a compromise, considered acceptable by the trade union, was reached in March 2019 to amend the relevant regulations, but could not be adopted before the European Parliament elections, further trilogue negotiations took place. Even under the German Council Presidency in the second half of 2020, no agreement was reached. The compromises reached in the trilogue in March 2019 and December 2021 could not garner a majority in the Council and failed, in particular, due to the rejection by the German government.

The compromises, which were deemed acceptable by the union, would have brought significant improvements, particularly for the construction sector. It is currently unclear to what extent negotiations will continue based on these compromises. The union will work closely with its member unions throughout the process and will use all available political means to effectively combat widespread abuses. Furthermore, the union will actively participate in national and European initiatives to promote digitalization in the context of coordinating social security.

**The Future of Social Law**

In 2018 and 2019, the union and the Friedrich Ebert Foundation (FES) jointly organized social law conferences, among other things, to emphasize the importance of social law for overall societal consensus. To further promote and raise awareness of social law with the aim of increasing its social importance, the "Social Law Network" was established. This is a platform for (primarily) legal professionals (from social law, academia, and organizations) with the aim of bringing together information from all areas and providing social law actors with the opportunity to coordinate their activities. The union is a key pillar of this collaboration. Particular attention is paid to making social law attractive, especially to young students. The digital discussion event "Family Support through Social Law," held in 2021, and the highly successful digital one-day event "Black Box Social Law: Design - Actors - Future," which was primarily aimed at students and took place at the BSG (Federal Social Court), served this purpose. The union and FES jointly operate the network, including the homepage launched in 2020.

**Free of Charge Proceedings in Social Courts**

Once again, in 2020, an initiative by two federal states within the Bundesrat (Federal Council) attempted to introduce a special court fee into the social court proceedings, which are generally free of charge for those insured. This time, the intention was to charge a fee for plaintiffs who have filed more than nine lawsuits in a federal state within ten years, a fee that would have had a punitive character. As in previous years in similar situations, the union strongly opposed this proposal. Thanks to early intervention, it was possible to prevent this unbalanced initiative from being pursued further in the legislative process.

**The Union as an Expert Third Party at the Federal Constitutional Court**

The union participated as an expert third party in the proceedings before the Federal Constitutional Court (BVerfG) regarding the sanction regulations of the SGB II (Social Code II), the judgment of which was announced on November 5, 2019. In particular, it organized the coordination of the positions of other organizations for the oral hearing. With this judgment, key demands of the union regarding sanctions in the SGB II were implemented.

In early 2020, the union, in collaboration with organizations, academia, and the social courts, conducted a workshop to analyze and anticipate future developments. Based on a position paper submitted by the union, guidelines for future regulations were outlined to be presented in the legislative process. The union is also involved as an expert third party in a pending case before the Federal Constitutional Court. The constitutional complaint concerns the argument that the contribution regulations of the statutory health, pension, and long-term care insurance are unconstitutional to the extent that the regulations do not distinguish between contributors with and without children and do not take into account the number of children of the contributors. The Federal Social Court had rejected the lawsuit. The constitutional complaint alleges a violation of the principle of equal treatment under Article 3(1) of the Basic Law, because insured individuals with children pay the same contributions to health and pension insurance as insured individuals without children. The union has submitted a statement on this matter.

Since 2017, the Temporary Agency Work Act has prohibited temporary workers from being used by companies as strikebreakers. An employer challenged this before the Federal Constitutional Court in a constitutional complaint - unsuccessfully. The Federal Constitutional Court declared the complaint "partially inadmissible" and "unfounded" in June 2020 and did not consider it for a decision. Therefore, it remains the case: temporary workers may not be used as strikebreakers.

In 2018, the union continued to advocate for the right of civil servants in Germany to exercise the fundamental right and human right to strike.  Therefore, the union supported two constitutional complaints filed by civil servant teachers who were challenging the ban on strikes for civil servants. The union supported the complaints by providing expert opinions and argued for the abolition of the status-based ban on strikes for civil servants. In the judgment announced on June 12, 2018, the Federal Constitutional Court rejected the complaints – with a somewhat unconvincing justification.  The issue of "remuneration for prisoner labor" also occupied the Federal Constitutional Court in 2018.  For the repeated time, the Federal Constitutional Court dealt with the constitutionality of the level of remuneration for prisoner labor. The union again expressed its critical views on the existing legal remuneration conditions for prisoner labor and considered them to be unconstitutional.  It was pointed out that the economic activity and exploitation of prisoner labor by correctional facilities had increased significantly, even within the private sector.  Furthermore, the union argued that the introduction of the statutory minimum wage should be taken into account when assessing the constitutionality of the remuneration for prisoner labor.  Finally, the union participated in the proceedings regarding the constitutional complaint before the Federal Constitutional Court on the issue of the constitutionality of the so-called external division of occupational pension entitlements within the framework of equalization of benefits in the event of divorce (Section 8, Paragraph 17 of the Equalization of Benefits Act) as a so-called expert third party in the oral hearing, and expressed its opposition to the constitutionality of this provision. Numerous important judgments from the social and labor courts, the Court of Justice of the European Union (CJEU), and the European Court of Human Rights (ECHR) were published and analyzed by the union.  These were published and commented on in the union's magazines "Arbeit und Recht" ("Labor and Law"), "Soziale Sicherheit" ("Social Security"), and "Der Personalrat" ("The Works Council"), on the union's website and the Bund-Verlag website, and in "juris."  They concerned, for example, decisions on the protection of privacy in the employment relationship, the relationship between freedom of movement for workers and the recognition of professional experience in collective bargaining agreements, covert video surveillance, remuneration for on-call and standby times, and the obligation to record working hours.

**Social Security and the Labor Market**

It is worth highlighting the magazine "Arbeit und Recht" (AuR), which provides concentrated information on German and European legal policy and legislation, always with a focus on science, judicial practice, and union practice. It works closely with the judiciary, the member unions of the union, and the union itself.  Through publications in AuR, important legislative processes were accompanied, such as the Works Council Modernization Act, the implementation of the EU Whistleblower Directive, but also current issues in the context of the Corona pandemic and labor law were highlighted.

**Legal Studies - Focus Areas: Labor and Social Law**

The union always places great importance on ensuring that labor and social law have a place in legal education.  A resolution of the Conference of Ministers of Justice from November 2019 ("Possibilities for harmonization of legal examinations") took a different direction:  it stated that, among other things, the study of labor and social law should be devalued in terms of its scope and assessment.  During the hearings on the amendment to the German Judges Act, the union was able to present its position.  As a result, the status of labor and social law, which is so important to the union, in legal education was not worsened.  However, the goal remains to upgrade both areas of study due to their importance for the working and living conditions of employees in the Federal Republic of Germany.

In international union work, the union is active in the X-Lawyers' Network Netlex and the Fundamental Rights and Litigation Advisory Group (Lawyers' Group on Fundamental Rights and Litigation) and participates in ad hoc working groups on legal policy issues.  It is represented on the advisory board of ILAW (International Lawyers Assisting Workers), a network of lawyers representing workers founded under the leadership and coordination of the American trade union umbrella organization X.

Social Security and the Labor Market: Pension Policy

During the reporting period, the union successfully advocated for the necessary political attention to be given to the issue of adequate retirement security through intensive political work, campaigns, and events, as well as through the "Future Dialogue" initiative. As a result, the statutory pension level was stabilized at least until 2025. While the union's goal of achieving a lasting stabilization and increase has not yet been fully realized, it is a success that the pure contribution rate dogma and a declining pension level have been overcome. Since then, efforts have been intensified to ensure the long-term stability of the pension level and to achieve further increases. In this context, the union, as part of the federal government's "Reliable Intergenerational Contract" commission, was able to ensure that its recommendations included a minimum level of between 44 and 49 percent (security level before taxes). Currently, the pension level may fall to 43 by 2030, and after 2030, there is no lower limit. The union has clearly stated through a minority vote that the minimum level must not be below 48 percent. The pension for those with disabilities has been significantly improved. This improvement is thanks to the union's long-term and intensive work, which has consistently highlighted the extremely high risk of poverty among those receiving disability pensions. The pension entitlements for children born before 1992 have also been expanded. These are now almost as high as those for children born after 1992. A major achievement of the union and its long-standing commitment is the Basic Pension Act, which came into effect in 2021. This act implemented several key demands. A central element is the pension supplement of up to 418 euros for those with low pensions who have made long-term contributions. The union has successfully advocated for the introduction of such a supplement through active public relations work. It also worked to ensure that the eligibility requirements were not too high, that the supplement was sufficient, and, in particular, that no income adjustments were made. While the union was not able to achieve all of its goals in this area, the basic pension supplement has been successfully introduced, and approximately 1.3 million people will benefit from it. Another important demand of the union has also been implemented: since 2021, the statutory pension is no longer fully taken into account for basic income support, housing benefits, and similar benefits. This long-standing demand of the union has now been implemented, although inadequately, as it only applies to individuals who have at least 33 years of contributions. However, it is a significant improvement for those affected. The union, represented by Annelie Buntenbach, has been actively involved in the federal government's "Reliable Intergenerational Contract" commission. This commission was tasked with developing proposals on how the pension system could be designed in the future to ensure an adequate level of security during a period of demographic change, while maintaining an acceptable contribution rate. The union has supported the commission's work through intensive public relations and by initiating scientific studies, and has also prepared its own report on pension policy. The union was able to demonstrate in the commission that pension policy is always a matter of distribution policy. The commission's recommendations do not see a need to link the retirement age to life expectancy or to even consider further increases. It also recommends that the pension level should not be further reduced. The commission proposes that the pension level should be fixed at a minimum value for a period of seven years. This has allowed the union to ensure that pension policy is no longer solely determined by the contribution rate dogma and is not only presented as a burden, but that the benefits side and an adequate pension are once again brought into the focus of political attention. Closing the gender pension gap remains a goal of the union. Priority is given to the labor market, with a focus on equal pay and an equal distribution of care and work responsibilities. Targeted measures in the pension system, such as the basic pension and the "mothers' pension," further reduce the pension gap, especially for those who are already retired or will be soon, as changes in the labor market can only have a limited impact on this group.

Union Activities in Care Policy

Over the past four years, the union has been actively advocating for improvements in care services for those in need of care, caregivers, and for better working conditions for professional caregivers. While previous efforts focused primarily on improving benefits, the proposals outlined in the 2018 Care Strengthening Act, part of the coalition agreement, mainly aimed at implementing the "new definition of care needs" by ensuring sufficient care staff in elderly care and improving staffing levels in hospitals. The union, in its statement on the Care Staff Strengthening Act, emphasized that this qualified personnel must have good wages and working conditions to retain skilled workers and meet the growing demand for skilled workers in the future. In response to the federal government's immediate care program, the union called for urgent measures to improve the staffing situation, which is necessary for both hospital and elderly care. Furthermore, the union participated in the advisory board for setting minimum staffing levels in hospitals, contributing to the development of mandatory staffing guidelines. The union has clearly communicated to the public and to lawmakers that it expects a sustainable solution that includes binding staffing guidelines for all care areas and the establishment of a system for needs-based staffing. The union supports the interim solution of a care staff policy (PPR 2.0). From 2018 to 2020, the union actively developed proposals as part of the coordinated care action of the ministries BMAS, BMG, and BMFSFJ to significantly improve the daily work and working conditions of caregivers, strengthen training and qualification in care, and ensure fair pay and broader opportunities for skilled and auxiliary staff. Union participation involved all key stakeholders in elderly, hospital, and pediatric care, both at the top-level umbrella organization and in five working groups. To address the specific challenges during the COVID-19 pandemic for those receiving care, caregivers, and family caregivers, numerous statements were made in legislative proceedings of the German Bundestag. The union, in its statement on the Hospital Relief Act, highlighted the special situation for employees in the healthcare sector and called for greater responsibility from employers, in accordance with a special duty of care, to maintain well-functioning services, especially during the pandemic. The already difficult working conditions of caregivers were further exacerbated by the additional stress. The union has clearly stated that it is important not to unilaterally reduce control and care obligations to increase staffing levels, but to maintain occupational safety and workload standards even under difficult conditions. Because the medical system relies on employees in the healthcare sector, absences, such as those caused by infection of caregivers due to a lack of protective equipment or psychological and physical overload due to permanently restricted rest periods, must be avoided. To maintain service standards, the union strongly emphasized that ongoing monitoring of compliance with service standards is necessary. During a pandemic, it is essential that training in healthcare professions is clearly regulated and completed even under difficult conditions. The union emphasized that it must not be possible to circumvent legal requirements for training quality. The issue of self-determination in care was central in 2020. The decision was whether care, especially for patients on ventilators, could also be provided on an outpatient basis, for example, in the patient's own home. For the union, it was essential to adequately consider not only qualitative and financial, but also personal, family, and local circumstances. The goal was to avoid personal hardships.

The union emphasized that the right to a self-determined life must be guaranteed and that it could contribute to further improvements to the intensive care and nursing law. The union also continued its work in the independent "Council for the Reconciliation of Care and Work" and significantly shaped the political debate within this body. Its activities focused on demands for financial support for family members who have reduced their working hours due to care responsibilities, and for flexible working arrangements for caregivers. The union also recognized the importance of expanding outpatient care, with an adequate staffing ratio, in the debate on reconciling care and work. The financing of care remains a crucial issue. With an increase of 0.5 percentage points in contribution rates on January 1, 2019, spending on long-term care insurance increased significantly. The union called for a comprehensive concept to improve care before burdening insured individuals and contributors. At the same time, it is essential to ensure that care does not impoverish those in need of care or their families. An important area in this regard was the union's demand for the further development of social care insurance towards a comprehensive care insurance system, as decided by the union. The union has developed and adopted key principles for the solidarity-based development of social care insurance. The long-promised reform of the financing of care services was finally increasingly demanded by the union in 2020. Based on its own concept for the implementation of a comprehensive care insurance system for all, covering all care services, the union evaluated the government's proposals and called for corrections. This once again underscored the union's crucial role in shaping social security and promoting the sustainable development of social systems. The union successfully continued its collaborative work in the "Alliance for Good Care" over the past four years. The alliance, founded in 2012, now includes 23 nationwide organizations, welfare and consumer associations, unions, self-help groups, and patient advocacy groups, representing the entire spectrum of society. The organizations and associations involved in the alliance alone represent over 13.6 million members, approximately 16,500 care facilities and services that provide care for 550,000 people daily, and employ 400,000 people. The common goal of the alliance partners, and especially the union, remains to highlight the problems in care and emphasize the urgency of action, because: Good care is a human right! Health policy and health economics: The union adopted detailed and fundamental positions on health policy. A key demand was a return to a parity contribution rate system and the development of a union guiding principle of "Social Health Economy" to counter the increasing profit-orientation in the healthcare system. The financing imbalance to the detriment of employees, particularly in light of blatant developments such as employee supplementary contributions, was the focus of the union's health policy efforts during the reporting period. Therefore, the commitment of three parties represented in the Bundestag to return to parity contribution rates in statutory health insurance was a significant success. This was complemented, after a corresponding campaign by the union and its affiliated unions ("Hey Boss, where's your half?"), by the return to parity contribution rate financing in 2019. Nevertheless, the disparity in contribution rates had two crucial consequences. First, from 2005 to 2018, employees paid more than 70 billion euros more in contributions than employers, who were able to save this contribution. Second, during this time, 17 billion euros in contribution reserves accumulated in the statutory health insurance funds. This is why there was no loud protest from employers. In particular, the contribution reserves of 21 billion euros accumulated up to mid-2020 aroused interest.

The government, led by the Union, initiated a massive legislative process that, during the last legislative period, resulted in 31 draft laws and 25 draft regulations in the areas of healthcare and long-term care. The union actively participated in 51 hearings, whenever possible given the short deadlines, coordinating with its member unions to advocate for the interests of workers. Many of these laws aimed to increase the financial contributions of service providers, which raises questions about whether they truly improve the quality of care. However, a significant issue remains: a funding deficit of approximately 17 billion euros for 2022. Overall, the previous governing coalition spent 38 billion euros in contributions, of which approximately 25.5 billion euros came from contributions paid by insured individuals.

**Social Security and the Labor Market**

The union's increased involvement in the social insurance system has contributed to the professional development of union members and has helped to promote union positions within statutory health insurance funds. The union has taken on important self-governance roles and has even expanded its staff to support these activities. In health insurance systems with strong union representation, the union has been able to strengthen its role as an advocate for insured individuals and promote union positions. It is important to continue working to improve healthcare and to advocate for policies that benefit workers.

On the other hand, legislative changes have significantly weakened the role of social partners in the self-governance of health insurance funds. The medical services (MDs) were removed from the control of the statutory health insurance funds, and the self-governance mandates were subject to very restrictive conditions (limitations on terms of office, the number of mandates, and the inclusion of other interest groups). The fact that social self-governance of the MDs still exists is thanks to the joint efforts of the union and the BDA (Confederation of German Employers' Associations). The union has taken on the task of involving union representatives in the MDs in discussions on healthcare policy with the union, the union, and self-governance representatives of the health insurance funds.

Unfortunately, one thing has not changed since the last regular union meeting: in Germany, the focus of healthcare policy discussions is often on issues other than addressing the root causes of illness. These issues often relate to organization and financing. The union would like to partner with others to improve the social determinants of health, but has found few partners, except within the German Platform for Global Health. This is a disappointing situation.

As part of its long-term healthcare policy agenda, the union adopted a resolution entitled "Social Health Economy: Creating Quality Growth." This document outlines a guiding principle for the union and its member unions, providing a common position and a foundation for necessary updates. The union continues to support the concept of a citizen's health insurance system. However, the proposals put forward by the political parties did not align with the union's model. This is due to differing views on issues such as the future of private health insurance, the principle of in-kind benefits, contributions based on actual economic capacity, and the social self-governance of health insurance funds. There is also a significant gap between financial control and regulatory authority in healthcare policy. A scandalous example of this is Gematik, the organization responsible for promoting the telematics infrastructure in healthcare. In this case, the federal government has secured a legal majority, while the costs are fully funded by contributions from statutory health insurance funds. The governing coalition has been forced to acknowledge, particularly through the efforts of union representatives, that such arrangements are highly problematic. Specifically, the Federal Social Court (BSG) has ruled that the partial funding of the Federal Central Office for Health Education by contributions from statutory health insurance funds is unconstitutional.

The union represents the interests of employed individuals and their families in health policy. This applies to their roles as contributors, health insurance holders (including patients), and as employees. However, their interests are often disregarded by the majority of stakeholders. This misorientation has resulted in reforms that have had an unclear impact on the health of employed individuals and their families, but a clearly negative financial impact on them.

**Social Self-Administration**

Over the past four years, the union has diligently fulfilled its responsibilities in social self-administration. This has been challenging, as ongoing legislation by the federal government threatened to further undermine social self-administration. The union has strongly opposed the impact of the "Social Guarantee 21" on social self-administration and has actively engaged in lobbying to protect the interests of insured individuals. Furthermore, it has defended the substantive co-determination and participation rights of social self-administration and has been able to prevent the most extreme interventions by government ministries. This has successfully prevented the implementation of a radical intensification of the competition principle in healthcare.

Specifically, it has been made clear that the legal provision to reduce the ceiling on supplementary contributions from statutory health insurance funds to 0.8 months' salary represents an additional infringement on the budgetary autonomy of the administrative boards of statutory health insurance funds and a further step towards undermining social self-administration by social partners. The union has advocated for the maintenance of sound budgetary planning and has urged the legislature to refrain from further interference in the budgetary law of social self-administration.

In collaboration with other partner organizations, efforts have been made to prevent structural financial disadvantages for insured individuals in favor of employers, and to develop political measures to compensate for the increased burdens of recent years.

Within the framework of the social election reform, the union has taken a clear position on fair competition in the interests of insured individuals and has asserted its influence within the Federal Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs (BMAS) and in the social partner dialogue. In addition, preparations for the 2023 social elections have been intensified, with the "Union" further promoting the union's activities related to the social elections.

Over the past four years, the union has continuously continued its coordinating activities for union representatives in the social security branches of statutory health insurance (GKV), statutory pension insurance (GRV), and statutory accident insurance (GUV). Due to the pandemic, workshops and meetings for representatives were largely held online.

**Senior Citizen Policy**

The work in the area of union senior citizen policy is based on the understanding that senior citizen policy is a cross-cutting issue. This requires a change in the societal perception of aging, and also, to some extent, within the unions themselves. Older people are often viewed as recipients of social assistance, as people in need of help, or as a risk group, which does not reflect the interests of older colleagues within the union. They have a broad range of political interests.

Shortly after the union was founded in 2018, a decision was made to appoint a senior citizen representative. This person took office in September 2018 and coordinates the union's senior citizen policy working group and is responsible for the political work in this area. In November 2018, the union became a member of the Federal Association of Senior Citizen Organizations (BAGSO). This umbrella organization of over 200 organizations active in senior citizen policy is an important voice at the federal level. The union is now actively involved in all four specialist committees.

In 2018, a senior citizen policy conference was held in Gera, entitled "Society in Transition: How Digitalization is Changing Learning, Work, and Life." Furthermore, the union has worked intensively on the development of the key points of senior citizen policy, which were adopted by the union in April 2019. This provides the foundation for the union's senior citizen policy in the coming years.

The key policy points for senior citizens are based on previous resolutions from the union's social security and labor market committees, as well as current political developments. The update was necessary because there have been changes in the social and political positions due to current political developments, for example, in pension policy. The update also addressed issues such as digitalization, preventing crime among older people, and the participation of senior citizens in political decision-making at the local and state levels. This involves legally enshrining the participation of senior citizens at the state and federal levels. Several workshops were held during the reporting period to address this, and the topic of "managing pensions" was also extensively examined. The COVID-19 pandemic made it difficult to conduct in-person work and prevented the planned senior policy conference in 2020, which focused on "legally enshrining the participation of senior citizens." The pandemic and the political debate about the isolation of older people as a "risk group," as well as the then-lack of protective measures in care and nursing facilities, led the union to adopt a position paper on the topic of "older people and COVID-19" in the spring of 2020. Another important issue in the union's senior policy is the legal framework for the participation of senior citizens in politics. The union believes that it is essential for the democratic cohesion of society that the interests of senior citizens are represented by themselves and are given greater consideration in politics. Therefore, it is important to strengthen the legal framework for the participation of senior citizens. Unfortunately, only four federal states currently have laws on the participation of senior citizens. An important goal of the union was to focus more on this issue, especially in the run-up to the 2021 federal election and the state elections in recent years. To this end, the union adopted a corresponding resolution in September 2020, titled "Legal participation of senior citizens is urgently needed."

**Social Security and Labor Market**

To improve communication between the union's senior policy activists, a website was set up in 2018, where all important publications and resolutions are available. Another focus of the work of the senior policy working group, which met 17 times during the reporting period, is the fight against age discrimination, particularly in the area of financial services, insurance, credit lending, and even in volunteer work. It is essential to continue to advocate for legal improvements in this area. In February 2021, the union adopted senior policy demands for the 2021 federal election. Another focus is the issue of senior policy at the local level, for which a brochure was developed on the topic of "Local senior policy from the perspective of the union: areas of action, demands, goals." The union also commented extensively on the "8th Age Report of the Federal Government. Older people and digitalization" and participated in the statement by the BAGSO. The discussion of a European policy for older people was another focus. In the detailed statement on the "Green Paper on Ageing" presented by the European Commission, it was criticized that the interests of older people are only described at the European level under the heading "Demographic Change," and that this is completely inadequate. There is a lack of a European framework for a modern senior policy that covers all policy areas and is not limited to the topics of "demographic change," "transfer benefits," "care services," and "pension policy." Overall, it should be noted that the importance of senior policy will increase for the union in the coming years, given the increasing proportion of older people in our society. Currently, over 1.2 million members of the union fall into the category of senior citizens.

**G. Economy in Transition**

**Economic Situation and Employment Development**

The good economic development of recent years began to decline at the beginning of the reporting period and was marked by the COVID-19 crisis from 2020. In 2018, the economy still grew by a real 1.3 percent, driven in particular by domestic demand.

The strong labor market and favorable wage agreements negotiated by the unions had led to a stable development in private consumption. While investment in construction became a key area for union activity in the following year, growth noticeably slowed and, adjusted for inflation, ultimately reached only 0.6 percent in 2019 compared to the previous year. In 2019, core areas of industry were primarily affected by weaker demand in important export markets (particularly for capital goods) and by international uncertainties (trade conflicts, Brexit). In addition, there were challenges arising from transformation processes due to globalization, digitalization, and climate policy initiatives.
[Chart showing GDP development from 2018 to 2021, with percentage changes quarter-over-quarter and year-over-year. Source: Federal Statistical Office]

At the beginning of 2019/2020, the global COVID-19 pandemic began, leading to a real economic contraction of minus 4.6 percent in Germany. This was primarily due to production disruptions in the industrial sector caused by broken supply chains. COVID-related lockdowns in other countries led to delays in deliveries for the German industry. However, the lockdown in Germany itself, with its closed shops, restaurants, etc., also led to a decline in economic activity. In 2021, an economic recovery began, driven by an increasing number of people vaccinated against COVID-19, but this was hampered by the fourth wave of the pandemic and new bottlenecks in raw materials and various intermediate products. These bottlenecks, together with rising energy prices and base effects (low inflation in the previous year), also contributed to a relatively strong inflationary development. The labor market situation initially developed largely in parallel with the economic development. Until the COVID-19 crisis, unemployment fell, and even during the crisis, a sharp increase was prevented by labor market policy measures, in particular short-time work. In view of the economic development, the union focused its economic policy work on, among other things, the necessary support and shaping of the transformation. For example, it advocated for a large-scale investment program and initiated a growing social debate about reforming the debt brake and the need for credit-financed investments. Furthermore, strengthening domestic demand remained an important issue as a stabilizing element. This became particularly acute during the COVID-19 crisis: from the beginning, the union influenced the federal government's anti-crisis policy. Measures were evaluated and suggestions for changes were made under considerable time pressure. Overall, the federal government, like most state governments, reacted relatively quickly to the economic policy consequences of the pandemic. The debt brake was suspended in order to implement a stimulus package and other stabilization measures, as demanded by the union. However, the union repeatedly criticized problematic aspects of the anti-crisis policy: For example, it called for corporate aid to be more closely linked to employment guarantees and criteria for good working conditions (e.g., collective bargaining agreements). In addition, it advocated for extending the repayment periods for the state debts incurred due to the pandemic to at least 50 years.

Sustainability Policy / Energy Transition / Union Transformation

Sustainability: The union is committed to sustainable development in Germany, as well as in Europe and worldwide, and supports the United Nations' sustainability agenda with the goal of combining ecological sustainability with inclusive growth and social, gender-equal progress. To this end, the union has actively participated in the revision of the German Sustainability Strategy and has placed the focus on the theme "Leave no one behind." The union has emphasized core issues such as good working conditions and co-determination, reducing inequality, creating a fair framework for the socio-ecological transformation, investing, international justice, and the adoption of the Supply Chain Due Diligence Act.

The union has also addressed these issues in regular meetings of the dialogue group for preparing the State Secretary Committee for Sustainable Development, at the Chancellery's Forum for Sustainability, and at the United Nations Sustainable Development Summit, thus establishing itself as an important player in the sustainability discourse. The union has been actively involved in the energy, climate, sustainability, and transportation policy debates and political frameworks of recent years, achieving significant successes.

**Transformation**

The union has successfully advanced public awareness of the topic of "socio-ecological transformation." For example, in late August 2021, the union organized a transformation conference with speakers from unions, politics, business, academia, and civil society. During the conference, the union's Transformation Charter was also published, outlining the key union demands for shaping the transformation process. In addition, in 2020, the union, together with the Friedrich-Ebert Foundation, organized a digital conference on the Green Deal to discuss concrete measures, best-practice examples, and political recommendations for shaping the transformation process.

**Commission on Growth, Structural Change, and Employment**

Together with X and X, the union has, through its work in the "Commission on Growth, Structural Change, and Employment" (KWSB), been able to establish key guidelines for a socially acceptable phase-out of coal (e.g., collective bargaining agreements for closures, adjustment allowances, comprehensive structural support), which were subsequently implemented in the legislative process. It was crucial for the union that the phase-out of coal be accompanied by an acceleration of the energy transition, the protection of jobs, and new perspectives for value creation and high-quality jobs. These agreed-upon guidelines must also apply to an accelerated phase-out. The "coal compromise" is a good example of a forward-looking and fair approach to structural change.

**Climate Protection**

During the amendment of the Climate Protection Act (2021), the union successfully advocated for the impact assessment of measures in climate protection programs to not only consider CO2 emissions but also to include assessments of the impact on employment and the economic structure. In addition, the union successfully advocated for the introduction of a national CO2 pricing system that is socially just and economically viable, and is accompanied by social compensation mechanisms. The union organized regular dialogues with the Federal Ministry for the Environment to foster mutual understanding and to emphasize the union's demands in the transformation process. This dialogue took place at both working-level and high-level. The union also represented the interests of workers in the Ministry of the Environment's Climate Protection Action Alliance. By developing a position paper on key union demands for the hydrogen economy, the union has early on contributed to the political debate on the hydrogen economy. The union focused particularly on aspects such as job security, training, and structural policy potential. This technologically-driven discussion was thus expanded to include important union perspectives.

**Sustainable Finance**

Sustainable management of financial flows is becoming increasingly important at the European level and in Germany. Germany is lagging behind in this area, while other countries such as Canada, New Zealand, the United Kingdom, and France have already adopted sustainable finance strategies to clarify issues of transparency, clear assessment criteria, and public investment for a climate-neutral economy. In June 2019, an advisory board of 38 members from financial institutions, NGOs, and associations was established to develop a sustainable finance strategy that would make Germany a leading location for sustainable financial products. The union is a member of this advisory board by personal appointment, while employer associations have only advisory status. In the spring of 2020, an interim report with approximately 30 recommendations for action was presented. In the spring of 2021, the final report was submitted to the federal government. The union was involved in the advisory board's working groups on corporate governance and public sector (including the establishment of a transformation fund).

Trade union positions have also been incorporated into the other recommendations developed by the advisory board, as all recommendations were discussed and approved by the board. The aim is for financial markets to become a reliable driver of socio-ecological transformation. The coalition agreement of the new federal government refers to the final report and bases its recommendations on the advisory board's catalog of recommendations. The advisory board is also expected to continue its work. International financial markets are not particularly known for respecting workers' rights and interests. In the context of the sustainable finance regulatory initiative, it is now possible to influence standards from a workers' perspective. This is particularly important, as the market for sustainable financial products has been booming for several years.

Trade unions: The design of a socio-ecological transport transition has been a topic of discussion for trade unions in various forums and formats in recent years. The transport policy debate is often polarized when it comes to concrete measures. Therefore, at the international conference "Shaping the Trade Union Transformation," long-term solutions for urban logistics, commuter flows in the urban-rural area, affordability, and employment in the transport sector were discussed. The trade union called for a targeted industrial and transport policy strategy to renew value chains in Germany and Europe and to adapt to new technologies and demand. Only in this way can qualified jobs be maintained in the German economy. In the "Alliance for a Socially Compatible Transport Transition," the trade union worked with environmental, social, welfare organizations, and the Evangelical Church on the idea and implementation of a socially just and ecological transport transition. A key approach was the expansion of public transport, which should be comprehensive and accessible to all. Local and long-distance transport must be better coordinated, and the frequency of services should be increased. Rail transport should become a real alternative everywhere. An important area of focus for the transport transition remains the Passenger Transport Act (PBefG). Public transport is central to climate protection, as it can reduce traffic volume. The PBefG should support municipalities in providing passengers with an integrated and sustainable service of high quality. Protecting jobs and preventing precarious employment is essential for the quality of transport. When the law was amended, the trade union also advocated for the employees of new mobility services and platforms, for rules in the taxi industry, and for binding social standards in public transport, even when services are provided on a commercial basis. While municipalities can now set minimum requirements for remuneration, working hours, or breaks for ride-sharing services, the new PBefG does not represent social progress overall, as long as social standards do not apply to all companies, and unfair competition through social dumping remains permitted. The central trade union demand for an investment and innovation offensive in modern infrastructure was at least partially addressed in the previous legislative period, but the investment backlog at the municipal level remains significant. This was also evident within the trade union. While investments have been increased, there is still a lack of the cross-modal "master plan for transport" that the trade union has called for. A binding investment path to 2030 is needed to build up personnel in the administrations, accelerate planning, and quickly implement the politically desired expansion of rail and public transport. The transformation of the automotive industry and the mobility transition are important topics for many people and trade unions, which is why the trade union regularly organizes workshops for internal experience sharing.

The demands for the design of digital developments in companies, cities, and municipalities have been increasing for years. During the reporting period, the topic of smart cities has gained relevance at both the political and regional levels. More and more trade unions are facing the task of dealing with municipal digitalization strategies and their impact on employees. Since 2019, the federal government has been supporting a number of projects under the banner of "Smart Cities Model Projects," which use digital applications to promote integrated, sustainable, and community-oriented urban development.

In public discussions, politics, and science, there are different perspectives on smart cities. Depending on the stakeholders, different hopes are associated with them, ranging from increased resource efficiency and a more efficient administration to improved social participation. The neo-liberal perspective primarily hopes for growth opportunities and new markets. In this complex landscape, it is important to develop a union position that prioritizes the common good and workers. The union advocates for smart city projects to be aligned with the needs of people, for the comprehensive involvement of workers, and for solid data protection. The union has addressed this issue extensively. As a first step, smart city projects in Santander and Barcelona were visited to exchange experiences with colleagues in Spain. The union's publication "Smart City in the Social City," published in 2019, outlined the requirements for a fair digital urban development. In 2021, a workshop was held with various experts from academia and member unions to lay the foundation for a more in-depth union position. In addition, some unions have developed their own positions on smart cities and carried out various activities. The issue of skilled workers for climate protection has gained importance in recent years. The union has actively contributed to the political discourse in this area in 116 different forums. An example is the "Roadmap for Energy Efficiency" of the Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy, which strengthened the link between climate neutrality and high-quality employment. At the European and international levels, the union has also promoted the themes of socio-ecological transformation and a fair structural change (Just Transition). At international climate conferences (COPs), the union has established itself as a regular participant, organizing its own events and significantly shaping the international discourse with its demands for a fair transition. In addition, the union has maintained regular contact with colleagues from Europe and around the world to develop strategies, share experiences, develop common positions, and gain international recognition. This has been facilitated by a cooperation project with the Nordic trade union confederations and regular work in the Committee for Sustainable Development, Energy and Climate Change, where a union guide on adapting to climate change was developed, along with demands for the European Union.

**Environmental Policy**

In the area of environmental policy, the union has been involved in various national expert committees. For example, it organized participation in the environmental impact assessment committee to further develop the environmental management system EMAS. Other expert committees include the "Blue Angel" jury, which decides on the awarding of the Blue Angel certification, where the union has successfully advocated for the development of social award criteria, and the Technical Committee. However, there is still much to be done, especially with regard to concrete measures to achieve climate goals, particularly with a view to a social and ecological orientation of the transformation.

**Economy in Transition**

So far, it has not been possible to sufficiently establish the strengthening of collective bargaining agreements, co-determination, and good working conditions in new areas of the energy and industrial sectors. Therefore, these efforts must remain a core component of the union's work. In addition, the union has participated in the development of a "well-being calculator" by a project team from the Technical University of Berlin, which is now being tested in two collective bargaining departments of the union. The union also contributed to the final report of the "Future of Work" working group of the Sustainability Science Platform, which was presented in the summer of 2020. The report analyzes the potential of digitalization for a climate-friendly economy under the heading of "Sustainable Work." The report has generated great interest since its publication and was extensively discussed at the final conference of the Science Platform. The impetus from these activities will continue to flow into the union's social and political positions on the future of work.

For example, in statements on sustainable research, but also in statements on the German sustainability strategy. The report highlights the progressive impetus that labor policy can provide for sustainable development. Industry, Services, and Crafts Policy The topic of industrial policy experienced a renaissance in Germany and at the European level during the reporting period. In addition to global developments and digitalization, the issues of climate protection and the COVID-19 pandemic were major drivers of the discussion. The "National Industrial Strategy 2030" launched by Federal Minister of Economics Peter Altmaier in February 2019 sparked a political debate about the role of the state in industrial policy. In November of the same year, the Minister of Economics presented a revised version, "Economy in Transition." The trade union actively participated in the debates and advocated for a stronger and more active role for the state in its discussions with the Federal Ministry of Economics. The trade union called for a guiding state that promotes future technologies and, where necessary, also participates in companies and the development of production. However, the security of jobs and decent work must always be at the forefront. The strategies presented by the Minister of Economics are not sufficient to meet the challenges facing the German industry and its employees. In some cases, there is a focus on undermining the achievements of the trade unions. The trade union has actively participated and contributed its demands for a sensible industrial policy that puts employees at the center of the debate. Through successful public relations and publications, the trade union's positions were disseminated and brought into the political arena. The socio-ecological transformation of industry can only succeed if it is countered by deindustrialization, value chains are maintained, and employees are at the center. Due to stricter climate policy targets in Germany and the EU, the pressure on industry has increased. However, energy-intensive industries must also be preserved and modernized ecologically. The trade union has also advocated for active industrial policy to secure jobs and prevent carbon leakage under changing political conditions. Within the "Future of Industry" alliance at the Federal Ministry of Economics, the trade union was able to advocate for increased investment, infrastructure development, and training and qualification, which resulted in concrete recommendations for action. These must now be followed by action. During the COVID-19 pandemic, the trade union advocated for any state aid to revive the economy to be linked to conditions that promote decent work. A minimum requirement should be a guarantee of employment and location. The European Commission also published two industrial strategies during the reporting period: one in March 2020 and a revised version in May 2021. The COVID-19 pandemic, the Green Deal, and the mobilization of substantial funds within the new European recovery fund were the impetus for pursuing a more active industrial policy approach at the European level than in the past. The trade union has contributed its demands for a European industrial policy to the political debate. In particular, state aid law must be aligned with the socio-ecological transformation. It is important that the promotion of future-oriented technologies and industries is made possible, and that the impact on employment plays a central role. The trade union participated in consultation processes with industrial policy implications at the EU level and was also able to engage in dialogue with members of the European Parliament, thereby bringing its industrial policy demands into the political arena. Investments from non-EU countries in Germany or the EU are welcome if they maintain existing industries and secure jobs. However, it is problematic when such investments distort competition through foreign subsidies or are only aimed at extracting know-how from European companies without maintaining existing industries. Therefore, the European Commission and the German government have launched several initiatives to better control foreign investors and, if necessary, prevent takeovers.

In 2020, Germany amended the Foreign Economic Relations Act, which introduced stricter scrutiny of investments from non-EU countries. In the summer of 2020, the EU Commission published a white paper on the issue of third-country subsidies. The union supports the effort to better protect the EU from harmful investments. However, it is also important to consider the circumvention of labor, social, and environmental standards as unfair subsidies. Multilateral agreements for fair competition and the preservation of social and environmental regulations should take precedence. At the same time, governments must continue to use subsidies to promote the socio-ecological transformation. Under its Single Market program, the previous EU Commission (under President Jean-Claude Juncker) attempted to accelerate market deregulation. It proposed introducing a "services card" that would make it more difficult to verify compliance with consumer protection or social security regulations for cross-border services. There was a risk that this would introduce the principle of origin by the back door, which would put social and consumer protection rules under massive competitive pressure. Together with many other organizations, the union criticized these plans, brought them to public attention, and thus made a crucial contribution to stopping the project in the European Parliament in March 2018. The new EU Commission has now definitively shelved the project in 2021. Digitalization is shaping the structural change in the economy. The union advocated for the use of new technologies to improve people's lives and working conditions. The spread of digital platforms threatens to circumvent rules on labor protection, social security, or consumer protection. The union actively worked to establish a regulatory framework that ensures fair competition, social security, and good working conditions. Services provided through digital platforms must be subject to the same rules as those provided through traditional channels. The union supported the EU Commission's initiative from December 2020, the Digital Markets Act (DMA), which aims to counter the abuse of market power by very large platforms, in a statement. In addition to the Commission's proposals, workers who work on and through platforms must have the opportunity to build a countervailing power. The union has actively put forward proposals on this issue. Industrial policy and innovation policy are closely linked. Since 2010, 17 innovation dialogues have taken place at the Federal Chancellery, involving leaders from industry associations, corporations, research institutions, and major consulting firms. The union president participated in the steering committee. Dossiers on various innovation policy topics, such as quantum technology, the hydrogen economy, service innovations, STEM professions, AI technologies, and the circular economy, were prepared by a group of experts and coordinated by Acatech. These dossiers include material from interviews, studies, and position papers from the participating companies and organizations. The dossiers form the basis for discussions at the Federal Chancellery and are intended to set key priorities for the German government's innovation policy. The union has been actively involved in these processes, incorporating union policy priorities. In June 2020, the union president took responsibility for the investment chapter on the topic of "Innovations for a European Green Deal." In the dossier on the topic of "Resilience of supply chains and value networks" in January 2021, the union was able to incorporate many union positions on globalization, supply chains, and industrial policy. This so-called "resilience dossier" is frequently cited in unions and in the political circles of Berlin, due to the experiences gained during the COVID-19 pandemic. Not least because of the digital transformation, competition law as a whole must be reoriented and adapted. The union, together with its member unions, has established a working group on antitrust law. The aim of the working group is to respond to current developments in the field of competition and antitrust law and to develop a union position in order to accompany the political debate on competition issues. A joint discussion paper has been prepared, which addresses points for the development of a fair and functioning competition law. The topic of competition and antitrust law, or...

The concentration process is not only occurring in traditional areas of the economy, but also in the digital realm, as exemplified by companies like Google, Amazon, and Facebook.

**Economic Transformation**

The union and its affiliated unions have been in contact with representatives from the Federal Cartel Office and the Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs. This has allowed them to express their views and raise awareness of their role in competition law issues. This has also been beneficial as the work of the Commission on Competition Law 4.0, established by the Federal Government, began at the end of 2018. A statement was prepared for this purpose. Similarly, a public hearing provided an opportunity to present the union's position on competition law in the digital economy.

In 2020, the GWB Digitalization Act (the 10th amendment to the Act against Restraints of Competition) came into force. During a public hearing, the union and its affiliated unions were able to present their views on the GWB Digitalization Act.

In principle, it can be stated that fair and effective competition must have various objectives. The goal of fair competition law should be to consider the interests of all actors involved in and affected by the competition. Socially recognized goals such as job security, fair wages and working conditions, collective bargaining agreements, employee rights, co-determination rights, the continued existence of companies, social justice, as well as environmental, consumer, and data protection, must be taken into account in competition law. The union and its affiliated unions will continue to strive for these goals. This is not only about limiting market power at the horizontal level, i.e., balancing the interests of direct competitors, but also about creating a balance between powerful companies and their employees. This is because a significant portion of market power stems from the asymmetry between powerful platforms and the employees who provide services on them.

**Food Production**

The healthy and sustainable development of food production plays a major role in the transformation process. However, the union was not represented in the Federal Government's Future of Agriculture Commission. The union and its affiliated unions called for their participation and actively engaged in this vital area. The union adopted an approach of considering the entire food system – from agriculture, agricultural machinery, and fertilizer production to the food industry, food processing, retail, and restaurants – as a whole, and aligning it with the goals of high product quality, fair working conditions, and ecological sustainability. The union commissioned a study and organized workshops, both internally and externally, which led to a clear positioning of the union in the public debate.

**Craft Sector**

Currently, approximately 5.6 million employees and 362,000 trainees work in the craft sector. Together, they generate over €650 billion in revenue annually. During the reporting period, the union focused on strengthening collective bargaining agreements and self-regulation, as well as promoting fair working conditions in the craft sector.

Within the EU Services Package, in addition to a services passport, there was a proportionality test before the introduction of professional regulations. The union followed the political process and emphasized the importance of the master craftsman qualification. This helped to mitigate the proportionality test.

During the reporting period, the union also followed the fourth and fifth amendments to the Craft Code. Both amendment processes were initially very focused on reintroducing the master craftsman requirement in 16 crafts and on the master craftsman examination process. From the union's perspective, the Craft Code should be considered comprehensively. For example, the guilds and trade associations, which are the union's bargaining partners, should be strengthened to fulfill this task. The performance of the guilds should also be measured by whether they fulfill their task of concluding collective bargaining agreements. Underperforming guilds should be sanctioned by having their corporate status withdrawn.

The union also called for strengthening the role of volunteers in the general assemblies of the chambers and for the union to nominate the representatives of the workers' side. They also demanded equal representation on the master craftsman examination committees. When the requirement for a master craftsman qualification was reintroduced, it was crucial for the union that this be based on specific criteria. A key criterion was "risk potential and the protection of life and health." As a result of the fourth amendment to the Crafts Code, 16 occupations with high risk potential were brought back under the master craftsman requirement. The reintroduction of the master craftsman requirement is of immense importance, especially for the tile-laying trade, where the consequences of deregulation in 2003 were particularly noticeable. However, the union was unable to achieve its goal of also including building cleaners, who are also considered to be in occupations with high risk potential, under the master craftsman requirement. The fifth amendment to the Crafts Code achieved some successes in the field of craft examinations. For the first time since the Crafts Code was established, the union is mentioned in this context. While the complicated process of nominating examiners was not abolished, the union now has the explicit right to make proposals. In the master craftsman examinations, the workers' side is now involved for the first time in the process of nominating examiners, and important steps have been taken towards equal representation on the examination committees and the newly introduced "examination commissions," which conduct the actual examinations. However, it is problematic that, in future, partial performance in master craftsman examinations may be assessed and graded by a single examiner. The fifth amendment to the Crafts Code allowed the union to bring the issue of the declining prevalence of collective bargaining agreements in the crafts more into the focus of political debate. Currently, only 30 percent of employees in the crafts are covered by a collective bargaining agreement. Although the union was unable to achieve its goal of sanctioning underperforming guilds, the law was amended to clarify that the conclusion of collective bargaining agreements is part of the common commercial interest that the guild promotes. This amendment to Section 852 of the Crafts Code strengthens the guilds in their role as collective bargaining partners of the unions. The rejection of a competition based solely on the lowest price was long overdue and opens up perspectives for good working conditions in the crafts. In the past two years, the union has also become increasingly involved in the discussion about the skilled workers needed for the energy transition. The crafts play a central role in this. Structural and Regional Policy At the beginning of the 19th legislative period, the grand coalition agreed to phase out the extraction and power generation from brown and hard coal. Proposals for a specific roadmap and accompanying measures were to be developed by a "Commission for Growth, Structural Change and Employment" (KWSB), with broad social participation, in which the union, along with X, X, and X, was involved. In January 2019, the KWSB was concluded, with a final report and concrete measures that were significantly shaped by the union. The successes of the union and the unions included, without a doubt, the previously exceptional volume of structural strengthening funds amounting to 40 billion euros, as well as the requirement that new, sustainable value creation and good jobs be created in the coal-mining regions throughout the entire phase-out process until 2038. Collective bargaining agreements were also proposed to ensure comprehensive training and qualification measures for the affected employees. For older employees, the "adjustment allowance" (APG), which was already established in the hard coal sector, was recommended as a bridge to retirement, including collective bargaining supplements. Another important requirement was that the social partners be effectively and meaningfully involved in the decision-making process regarding the use of the structural strengthening funds, and that financial resources be provided for this purpose. This was followed by a phase of intensive lobbying by the union to ensure that the recommendations were also enshrined in law. More than a year after the conclusion of the KWSB, the German Bundestag passed the Coal Exit Act and the Structural Strengthening Act in July 2020, largely following the recommendations of the commission.

The union achieved significant successes through intensive lobbying during the political phase between the signing of the KWSB agreement and the enactment of legislation. This included ensuring that coal mining regions were considered in structural support programs and the implementation of the APG regulations. The APG is relevant not only to employees in the X and X organizations but also to employees of service companies in the coal industry who are members of the union. Furthermore, the union secured participation from social partners at the regional and local levels. However, the union's demand for participation at the national level was not implemented by the governing coalition parties. Similarly, the KWSB's request for financial resources to support the participation of social partners was not met. Despite this, the union was able to secure a four-year project funding from the STARK program, creating a union-supported structure for social partner involvement (the "Revierwende" project) at the national and regional levels. In the next legislative period, it will be crucial to bring this union support structure to life, to accompany the process of structural change in the coal industry, and to establish a sustainable support structure for social partners that lasts at least until the end of 2038. Furthermore, based on the coalition agreement between the SPD and the CDU, an investigative committee, "Equal Living Conditions," was established to address the problem of increasing regional disparities. However, this committee did not include any union representation, and it was unable to agree on concrete measures. As a result, the federal government issued "conclusions" based on the committee's work, outlining a 12-point program to achieve equal living conditions. The centerpiece of this program was the reorganization of the "Regional Economic Development" (GRW) program and federal funding programs into a "Nationwide Funding System." This system combined approximately 20 federal programs, unified their funding criteria (with the addition of a demographic component and an employment forecast). However, this did not result in a proactive funding policy, and the committee's recommendation for debt relief for heavily indebted municipalities was not implemented. On the 30th anniversary of German reunification, the union published a joint statement with the Federal Government's representative for eastern Germany. The federal government's political commitments to criteria for good work and to strengthening collective bargaining in eastern Germany are a significant achievement for the union. Regional structural policy must be designed more proactively in the future. Traditional structural support typically only begins when structural reports indicate that a region is in decline. In light of the digital and ecological transformation processes and the constitutionally enshrined principle of equal living conditions, this "backward-looking" approach to structural policy must be overcome. This is particularly important because the politically defined climate goals are accelerating the transformation processes and setting clear timelines for the future. Furthermore, increased political initiative is needed, especially in eastern Germany and in rural and structurally weak areas of the former West Germany, where demographic changes and the shortage of skilled workers are also playing a role. Unions are important actors in shaping the transformation process. They are both drivers of a socio-ecological transformation and advocates for ensuring that climate protection and structural change do not come at the expense of jobs and workers. The union fulfills an important societal role in this regard. From the union's perspective, the transformation should be shaped by an active, regional, and participatory approach to union development. Suggestions for development and revitalization strategies should be developed primarily within the union. To gain a better understanding of the relatively recent research and debate on the proactive structural policy needed for this, and to initiate a union discussion process, the union commissioned a discussion paper on preventive structural policy, which was presented before the federal election.

Key findings indicate the need for a decentralized, nationwide coordination of structural measures, a regionally-based network structure that encourages participation – including the involvement of those affected locally and social partners – and appropriate early warning indicators. To make this possible in the future, the legal framework must be adjusted accordingly. In 2014, an important legal hurdle was overcome at the European level with the "Partnership-based participation on an equal footing" for trade unions, social partners, and civil society in the European Structural Funds. The next step is to adjust the legal framework for state aid in regional policy. Early warning indicators need to be developed that allow us to support trade unions in the transformation process before it's too late. If the gross domestic product (GDP) is already low and the unemployment rate is high, it is too late for proactive structural policy. The Structural Change Commission for phasing out coal has developed a blueprint for how a proactive approach can be developed. Another issue in this context is the provision of comprehensive public services. Given the privatization trends of the past three decades and the resulting negative consequences for employees, public services must be strengthened and put on a solid footing to ensure equal living conditions. These findings have been formulated as trade union demands for a proactive structural policy and have been included in the coalition negotiations of the 20th legislative period. During the current legislative period, the trade union will demand, based on the discussion paper, a proactive structural policy in the political debate. For a long time, the trade union has advocated for the inclusion of criteria for "good work" in the Regional Development Act (GRW). This has gradually been achieved, but the federal states have a great deal of leeway within the coordination framework in terms of implementation. This applies to the selection of eligible projects, the definition of the basis for funding, the exclusion from funding, and bonus and penalty regulations. Therefore, the trade union has commissioned two studies to examine the state of implementation of the "good work" criteria. The first study in 2018 showed that numerous state regulations for the GRW now include criteria that, among other things, limit temporary work, reward collective bargaining agreements, or exclude part-time and fixed-term employment. This is a significant achievement. In the context of the new GRW coordination framework, another expert opinion was commissioned to evaluate the GRW guidelines, with regard to the implementation of good working conditions locally, the control of supervisory authorities, and the assessment of social partners, and was published in the spring of 2022. Another project, developed in collaboration with the trade union, trade union, and city and district associations, is the structural policy brochure "We are shaping things locally - Structural policy of the trade union." This was intended to recognize successful structural policy projects of the trade union locally (e.g., passenger surveys, series of events, campaigns) and to provide inspiration for colleagues. The brochure offers a successful and diverse selection of topics (e.g., economic transformation, energy policy, infrastructure policy, industrial policy) and shows that the trade union is doing and presenting very good structural policy work throughout the country.

**A capable state**

During the reporting period, it became increasingly clear that the federal government, the states, and local governments must invest much more to overcome the challenges of transformation and to provide good public services. In this context, the trade union has made investment a central focus of its economic policy activities - in the context of publications and events, and also with a new themed website. The "Shaping the Future with Investments - Preserving Democracy" campaign of the trade union also addressed this issue and brought the demand for greater state action to the wider public. A large-scale photo campaign during the federal election year identified and highlighted investment needs locally. Over 400 contributions on the trade union's website discussed the topics of infrastructure and investment.

Among other things, a joint initiative by the trade union and the Federation of German Industries (BDI) at the end of 2019, which called for an investment program based on a scientific study, has led to a broader consensus in the public about the need for government investment.  Gross investment by the state (% of GDP): Japan 3.5, Sweden 4.5, France, USA 3.5, EU 2.5, Germany 1.5.  Source: Ameco/EU Commission.  A capable state. The state is paying less in interest: 4%, 53.3%, 35.2%, 18.1%, 0%.  Interest payments by the state (in billions of euros), left scale; Interest payments as a percentage of economic output (GDP), right scale. Source: Expert Council, own calculations; 2020 & 2021: forecast.  Credit financing is no longer taboo.  Just a few years ago, the trade union and its affiliated unions were largely alone in their criticism of the investment-unfriendly debt brake.  Now, politicians from many parties and scientists, even within the mainstream of economics, are criticizing the debt rules in Germany and Europe.  The pandemic and the enormous public stimulus programs that followed led to the suspension of the debt brake's credit limits.  The trade union is clear: austerity must be prevented, and the debt brake in its current form must be abolished.  However, investments must also be promoted under the conditions of the debt brake.  A study commissioned by the trade union shows how the federal states are implementing the debt brake, how they used the emergency regulations in the wake of the Corona regulations, and what possibilities exist to make credit-financed investments.  In addition to public investments, private investments are also essential to overcome the transformation of the economy and decarbonization.  The trade union has emphasized its demand for policies that promote new, resource-efficient technologies, for example, through climate protection contracts or a transformation fund.  Public money must be made available as a "kick-start" for the modernization of the economy in order to stimulate private investment.  The financial situation of many municipalities was precarious even before the pandemic.  The Corona pandemic has further exacerbated the situation.  Therefore, in May 2020, the trade union published a position paper on the financial support of municipalities, and called for compensation for pandemic-related additional expenses (e.g. in the health sector) and revenue shortfalls (including from trade tax), as well as long-term measures.  Some of these demands were met in the federal government's stimulus package: in addition to a permanent increase in the federal share of the costs of accommodation in basic income support, compensation was decided for trade tax losses for the year 2020 by the federal government and the states.  The trade union also advocated that municipalities be relieved of their old debts and given a solid financial foundation.  The further development of trade tax into a municipal economic tax is one approach.  Stable and secure financial markets are needed for future investments.  However, the collapse of the payment service provider Wirecard, the concerted stock price manipulation at GameStop, and the enormous fluctuations around cryptocurrencies such as Bitcoin revealed the vulnerability and inefficiencies of the financial markets during the reporting period.  In general, developments in banking and financial market regulation during the reporting period were characterized by deregulatory efforts.  In the online discussion "Between economic crisis and stock market boom - Does the financial market still serve the real economy?" in June 2021, the trade union discussed the relationship between the financial sector and the real economy with representatives of civil society and science.  The trade union worked closely with the Brussels-based non-governmental organization Finance Watch, as well as the newly founded citizens' movement "Finance Transition" operating at the national level.  Both organizations focus on the issue of sustainable finance.

Municipal investment deficit: 26.1 billion euros, 18.0 billion euros, 34.0 billion euros, 15.6 billion euros, 55.6 billion euros. Source: Municipal Panel 2021 of the Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau (KfW); own calculations and presentation.

Schools and kindergartens, sports and culture, roads and public transport, administrative buildings and housing, other.

The situation has been further aggravated by the Corona pandemic. Therefore, in May 2020, the trade union published a position paper on the financial support of municipalities, and called for compensation for pandemic-related additional expenses (e.g. in the health sector) and revenue shortfalls (including from trade tax), as well as long-term measures. Some of these demands were met in the federal government's stimulus package: in addition to a permanent increase in the federal share of the costs of accommodation in basic income support, compensation was decided for trade tax losses for the year 2020 by the federal government and the states. The trade union also advocated that municipalities be relieved of their old debts and given a solid financial foundation. The further development of trade tax into a municipal economic tax is one approach. Stable and secure financial markets are needed for future investments. However, the collapse of the payment service provider Wirecard, the concerted stock price manipulation at GameStop, and the enormous fluctuations around cryptocurrencies such as Bitcoin revealed the vulnerability and inefficiencies of the financial markets during the reporting period. In general, developments in banking and financial market regulation during the reporting period were characterized by deregulatory efforts. In the online discussion "Between economic crisis and stock market boom - Does the financial market still serve the real economy?" in June 2021, the trade union discussed the relationship between the financial sector and the real economy with representatives of civil society and science. The trade union worked closely with the Brussels-based non-governmental organization Finance Watch, as well as the newly founded citizens' movement "Finance Transition" operating at the national level. Both organizations focus on the issue of sustainable finance.

This issue will receive increasing attention in the future, which is of great importance from a trade union perspective, especially when it comes to the financing of companies and projects, as well as the classification of socio-ecological criteria (taxonomy).

**A capable state: Tax policy and inequality**

During the reporting period, the trade union repeatedly pointed out the growing social disparities in society. In the "Trade Union Distribution Report 2018: Wages, rents, taxes - eliminating imbalances"; in the "Distribution Report 2019/2020: It's time for a fair distribution" and in the "Trade Union Distribution Report 2021: Inequality in times of Corona", current developments in the distribution of functional and personal income and wealth, especially in Germany, are presented in detail, and political action options are identified to address the constantly growing inequality. At the "Fairness is better - current distribution policy challenges" conference, the trade union engaged in discussions with scientists, politicians, and representatives of civil society to explore ways to address distribution imbalances.

During the reporting period, the distribution situation has hardly changed. While there were some successes in the primary distribution, mainly due to well-developed collective bargaining agreements and the overall economic exploitation of the neutral distribution space, the development in 2020/2021 was strongly influenced by the Corona pandemic and the associated massive economic and financial losses. In particular, poorer households had to and still have to bear the brunt, as their financial losses were significant, for example, due to unemployment, reduced working hours, or short-time work. For example, 50 percent of households with a monthly income of less than 900 euros experienced financial losses, while this was only the case for 26 percent of wealthier households. Income poverty is not a marginal phenomenon, but a societal problem. Currently, one in six people is considered to be living in poverty. In particular, trade union members, as well as young and older people, are at increased risk of falling into poverty.

**A capable state: Winners and losers**

In every crisis, there are also winners. The distribution of wealth also reveals a strong polarization. It is evident that the super-rich were able to increase their wealth despite or, more precisely, because of Corona. Current figures show that private wealth in this country is at an all-time high. The wealthiest 1 percent owns as much net wealth as approximately 87 percent of the population. Among the 100,000 German citizens with the highest wealth, there are, on average, ten people with assets of more than 50 million US dollars. An employee with an average net annual income would have to work for 2,000 years without spending a single cent to accumulate that amount of wealth. As a result, the total wealth in Germany has doubled since the beginning of the millennium. The wealthiest 1 percent of the population holds 3.8 trillion euros. This is more than Germany's annual gross domestic product. The concentration of wealth is often accompanied by a concentration of political power. Therefore, wealth is also a problem for democracy.

Inequality in Germany is very high. This harms society, the economy, social cohesion, and democracy alike. The reasons for the skewed distribution are obvious. Inequality is not a natural law, but the result of years of redistribution from the bottom to the top. The most important instrument against low wages is collective bargaining agreements to regulate wages and working conditions, and generally a high level of collective bargaining coverage. Politics must finally advocate for better framework conditions and a strengthening of collective bargaining. We also need a minimum wage that provides a living income. Rising real wages generate strong impulses for consumption and thus for growth.

Germany faces enormous challenges due to the Corona crisis. The structural change and the transformation of the economy also pose Herculean tasks. All of this can only succeed if the wealthy and those with assets contribute more to society.

Despite cross-party criticism and although two family relief laws provided an opportunity, the tax law changes during the reporting period have not contributed to correcting the structural deficits of the income tax system and the taxation of families.

The basic tax-free allowance is still too low. Tax rates have increased significantly, especially in the lower income brackets, and an increasing number of taxpayers are now subject to the top tax rate, even though their income is far from that of top earners. Meanwhile, top earners have not been sufficiently contributing to the financing of the common good based on their earning potential. With unchanged tax rates, the income tax rates were adjusted only to the minimum required by constitutional law and to reflect general price increases. Furthermore, the difference in relief for parents who can only claim child benefits has widened compared to higher-income families who benefit disproportionately from the child tax credit. In line with the decisions of the trade union, the trade union has further developed its tax policy priorities for the 2017 federal election, particularly in the context of family tax relief laws, and ultimately incorporated them into its overall tax policy concept in 2021. According to this proposed framework, the disposable income of a working couple with two children and a combined gross income of 60,000 euros would increase by more than 1,500 euros per year, while only those earning around 150,000 euros or more would gradually have to pay more taxes. Together with its demands for a fairer taxation of large fortunes and corporate and speculative profits, the trade union has demonstrated that a broad tax relief for working people, while simultaneously ensuring adequate funding for essential public services, is feasible. It has also shown how the "splitting of income between spouses" can be phased out without necessarily leading to a reduction in disposable household income for married taxpayers with low and medium incomes. The trade union's demands have received an increasingly positive response from politicians and the public. More parties than in 2017 raised the issue of reintroducing the wealth tax during the recent federal election campaign, and some of them contacted us beforehand to discuss it. The demand to be able to deduct trade union contributions independently of the employee allowance was positively received by the Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs and the parliamentary group of Alliance 90/The Greens. The introduction of the "trade union premium" for low-income earners as part of the law to implement climate protection in tax law was a first step towards the "trade union allowance" that the trade union had called for. In the reporting period, the trade union also took the opportunity to comment on further legislative procedures in the area of tax law. In 2018, the trade union advocated for a more targeted approach to the tax incentives for the construction of rental housing, focusing on the provision of genuinely affordable housing and creating incentives for a sustainable expansion of capacity in the construction industry. In the discussions on a constitutionally compliant reform of the property tax in 2019, the trade union repeatedly emphasized the importance of the property tax for the future viability of municipalities and called for a solution based on the market value of properties and guaranteeing municipalities their right to set their own tax rates. Where the federal states have since exercised their own legislative competence in the area of property tax, the trade union has supported its members in order to represent the trade union's positions to the state parliaments. On several occasions, the trade union was able to participate in the discussions on the annual tax law of 2019. On the one hand, it succeeded in having the daily allowance of eight euros for professional truck drivers, which had been developed within the framework of the "Trade Union" project, enshrined in the income tax law. On the other hand, together with the trade union and other associations and organizations, it succeeded in preventing the planned abolition of VAT exemption for certain adult education services, as well as the planned implicit doubling of the minimum job threshold for employees in private households who are also provided with accommodation. Despite intensive efforts and the support of some federal states in the Bundesrat, it was not possible to abolish the progressive tax rate on wage replacement benefits, which leads to a higher tax liability on taxable income, through the annual tax law of 2020, or at least to suspend it temporarily.

In this legislative process, it was only possible to increase the allowance for non-cash benefits from 44 to 50 euros, and to ensure that any collective bargaining agreements and company or works agreements do not conflict with this tax exemption. Throughout 2021, the union worked intensively to eliminate the double taxation that particularly affects cross-border workers living in France, when their already net-based substitute income is still subject to income tax in their country of residence. Despite the federal Ministry of Finance's general support for the union's objective, a solution has yet to be found.

**Public Procurement**

Fair competition in public procurement is an important tool for strengthening collective bargaining agreements overall. Because there is still no industry-wide system of fair competition in procurement, the union is advocating for strengthening social criteria and promoting fair competition across industries in public procurement at the federal and state levels. In particular, the changed jurisprudence of the European Court of Justice (e.g., the ECJ Regio Post ruling) and the revised EU directive on the dispatch of workers have significantly expanded the scope for applying collective bargaining agreements in public procurement. The so-called Rüffert ruling has undermined the arguments against this. Therefore, in May 2020, the union updated its position paper and reaffirmed its demand that public contracts should only be awarded to companies that adhere to fair competition principles, i.e., that pay at least the wages stipulated in the relevant collective bargaining agreements. The ILO Convention No. 94 is also finally being ratified by the federal government. The union has developed a concept outlining how a fair competition regulation could be implemented at the federal level. These proposals were taken up by the Federal Ministry of Labor and the Federal Ministry of Finance in the spring of 2021, but have not yet been implemented. Further work is needed in this area. Some federal states are leading the way by introducing various fair competition regulations in their state procurement laws. Berlin and Thuringia have introduced industry-wide fair competition regulations. In Saarland, there is currently a draft law that will soon be debated in parliament. These positive examples have a significant impact on other federal states. Therefore, the union has actively supported these initiatives. However, since a large proportion of contracts are still awarded at the municipal level, the union has also focused on this level. This is where the scope for socially responsible procurement is greatest, due to the autonomy of local governments. Best-practice examples from municipal procurement demonstrate this. On the other hand, there are also uncertainties and reservations among municipalities regarding the application of fair competition clauses in procurement. This was one of the findings of a survey of municipal procurement bodies conducted by the union, together with its affiliated unions and local branches, in 2019/2020. As part of a nationwide campaign, volunteer members confronted local authorities responsible for procurement with questionnaires on fair competition in procurement. The questionnaires asked whether fair competition criteria play a role in tenders and how they are checked. This demonstrated a high level of commitment from the volunteer members, and 330 responses were received from almost all federal states. In some cases, the survey led to direct successes. For example, the city of Ludwigshafen announced that, as a result of the survey, it would introduce its own controls for minimum wages and fair competition. The city of Mainz announced that, since 2019, it has included the "collective bargaining wage" criterion in its scoring matrix for evaluating company bids, with a weighting of 10 percent. These actors and best-practice examples should serve as models for other cities and municipalities. However, it also became clear that, while municipalities often recognize their political responsibility and role model function, legal uncertainties, time pressure, and staff shortages can prevent them from applying social criteria in practice. Therefore, the union is committed to raising awareness and providing support to cities and municipalities regarding the application of fair competition in procurement practices.

The union has developed a series of workshops on the application of collective bargaining agreements and social criteria in procurement processes, to encourage municipalities to use collective bargaining clauses in their public tenders and to address potential obstacles. Starting in the fall of 2021, the union organized online workshops for municipal procurement departments as part of a pilot project. Under the motto "Good work and collective bargaining in procurement: there's more potential here!" the workshops highlighted opportunities for applying collective bargaining clauses in public procurement by municipalities, with the support of lawyers specializing in procurement law. The first workshops were held in Baden-Württemberg, and further workshops in other federal states are planned. In addition, opportunities for cooperation with other stakeholders are being explored to establish the workshops as a permanent part of the training landscape.

**Housing and Consumer Policy**

The shortage of affordable housing in Germany has become increasingly apparent during the reporting period. Rents have skyrocketed, and housing shortages have increased, particularly in urban centers, but also in many other cities. Against this backdrop, the union has advocated for the creation of affordable housing and has established itself as an important and competent player in housing policy. This has strengthened the interests of employees in general, and specifically in the construction and housing sectors, in the public debate. The union has defined housing as one of the key themes in its future dialogue. The union's "Housing Action Week" in March 2019, with 200 events nationwide, marked the beginning of this focus. Since then, the issue has been addressed more intensively and frequently brought to the public's attention. Most recently, the union participated in the "Rent Freeze" campaign in 90 cities and in the large rent demonstration in September 2021. Through regular exchanges between the union and its members, training, and educational materials, the union has established itself in many places as an important and competent contact point for housing policy issues. The union's housing policy activities have strengthened its coalition work at all political levels. Together with tenants' associations, social organizations, and tenants' initiatives, the union has set priorities for a social housing policy and the specific interests of employees in the construction and housing sectors. This is largely thanks to the commitment of many colleagues from the X and X unions. The union has also strengthened the exchange between different union groups and between thematic areas such as union and senior policy issues. A regular housing policy newsletter and communication between all levels of the union ensure the flow of information within the union. Beyond the union, the union has sharpened and further developed its housing policy positions in consultation with its members. In the fundamental and forward-looking field of land policy, the union (unlike tenants' and social organizations) has presented detailed positions and has prepared regional unions for action through a training series. The housing policy brochure "Affordable housing means half the rent" has been published in its fourth edition and is recognized far beyond union circles. The union is part of the "Housing is a Human Right" coalition and the "Rent Freeze" campaign. The union's support for the European Citizens' Initiative "Housing for all" underscores its ambition to be comprehensively active in housing policy, not just in isolated cases. In the area of consumer policy, the union has strengthened the interests of employees in consumer policy through networking with consumer organizations and participation in various committees. For example, consumer organizations have become more aware of the situation of employees in the food production industry, and the issue of age discrimination in insurance and financial services was raised by the union in the consumer advisory board of the BaFin (German Federal Financial Supervisory Authority). The union's "Gewerkschaft Warentest" (union consumer testing) has taken into account the social dimension or the situation of employees along the production chain in numerous tests.

Due to the economic consequences of the Corona pandemic, the union advocated for consumer credit deferrals and the suspension of service disconnections. The union's work as a leading organization in civil service policy was significantly influenced by the effects of the federalization of civil service law during the reporting period. Since the federalism reform in 2006 and the subsequent transfer of legislative competence for regulating the employment of civil servants in the states and municipalities to the states, the union strongly warned against a patchwork of civil service laws. This particularly affected salaries, which were increasingly diverging, ultimately leading to fundamental rulings by the Federal Constitutional Court on the issue of the appropriateness of salaries. Since then, the salary policies of the 17 employers have been in a constant state of repair, always accompanied by the union. The goal was to prevent further divergence in salaries and to reduce the salary gap. However, a nearly historic step, the introduction of a flat-rate allowance, is also thanks to the legislative competence of the states. This allowed for the de facto elimination of the obligation to conclude private health insurance, thus addressing a long-standing injustice in some federal states, as the employers cover half of the health insurance contribution. The states that offer the flat-rate allowance have recognized the need for action and are thus fulfilling their duty of care towards their civil servants to a greater extent. In 2018, the state of Hamburg took the lead, followed by four other states: Berlin, Brandenburg, Bremen, and Thuringia. Baden-Württemberg and Saxony have enshrined this instrument in their current coalition agreements. Such an initiative from the federal government was unthinkable during this period due to the political power dynamics and remains a central issue.

During the reporting period, the Federal Civil Servants Representation Act (BPersVG) was amended. The union and its member unions had been calling for a revision for a long time. The previously valid version dated back to 1974. From the union's perspective, the central issue was whether sufficient account was taken of the union's changing role and whether the employee representatives had the appropriate tools to address the realities of work in the digital age. The discussion about revising the BPersVG gained momentum with the coalition agreement of the federal government in February 2018. In the autumn of 2019, the Federal Ministry of the Interior, Building, and Community (BMI) presented "Key Points for the Amendment of the BPersVG." These contained many controversial proposals, which the union strongly criticized, as they would have restricted the employee representatives. The majority of these proposals were prevented by political pressure from the union in the amendment passed in April 2021. However, the union was not satisfied with the result. With regard to adjustments to the BPersVG that affect the substantive co-determination rights, the amendment brought little new. In the area of co-determination in the complex of technical monitoring devices, there was even a significant deterioration. Furthermore, the alignment with the provisions of the Works Constitution Act was lacking in crucial areas. While there were some positive aspects, such as the regulation for the transitional works council that the union had demanded, the overall result was disappointing.

In February 2020, based on a decision by the union, an initiative was launched "to draw attention to the increasing instances of abuse and disrespect towards employees in the service of society." The two main objectives of the campaign were to raise greater public awareness of the issue and to collect reliable data using uniform criteria for all professional groups in the public and privatized sectors.

"STOP ABUSE OF EMPLOYEES IN THE PUBLIC AND PRIVATIZED SECTORS! IT DOESN'T JUST HAPPEN. WE HAVE TO STOP IT!" An initiative of the union & P = VG.

Despite the adverse circumstances caused by the pandemic, the initiative was established nationwide. With a comprehensive poster campaign in 22 cities and over 300 locations, as well as focused online communication, over three million people across the Federal Republic were reached.

A particular success of the initiative was mobilizing members within the union's internal organization. Numerous colleagues in various districts, the union itself, local branches, and the public sector union participated in implementing the initiative, thereby raising its profile. For example, some colleagues on the ground, in cooperation with regional transport companies, decorated a tram and eight buses with the initiative's designs. Regarding the second key objective of the initiative – collecting reliable data on incidents of abuse – significant progress was also made. Following a request from the union to Federal Interior Minister Horst Seehofer, further discussions led to an agreement to conduct a comprehensive study led by the ministry. The goal of the empirical research, launched in October 2021, is to estimate the extent of violence against employees in the public and private sectors in Germany. The union is working to guide and advocate for a consistent recording of all incidents across all professional groups in the public and private sectors, and is partnering with the Interior Ministry to achieve this. Initial results are expected in 2022. In summary, the initiative resonated with people and, in particular, contributed to mobilizing union members. The union's executive board has therefore extended the initiative for two years.

[Image: Visualization of the discussion in the panel "Is our society becoming more violent?" at the initiative's kickoff meeting. Illustration: Magdalena Wiegner (sauschnell.com) and Gabriele Schlipf (momik.de). Photo: Union/Danny Prusseit]

A STAND AGAINST ABUSE OF EMPLOYEES IN THE PUBLIC AND PRIVATE SECTORS.
Outdoor advertising featuring the initiative's posters, here in Halle/Saale. Photo: Union/Karsten Priedemann

[Image: "A capable state" logo]
Union Policy 137
Union Policy 140

The topic of Corona has been omnipresent for two years. Humanity, solidarity, and cohesion are the foundations of the union. Therefore, even during this difficult time, we were able to stand strong together. As an initial measure, FAQs (Frequently Asked Questions) were created for young people in training, studying, and working, to provide quick information and assistance, which were constantly updated. In addition to union advice, many young people utilized the advisory services – such as "Your Network in University" and "Dr. Apprentice" – and received individual and anonymous consultations. As a second step, the union, in collaboration with member unions, developed focused demands to protect young people during the Corona crisis and integrated them into the lobbying process. The union was active nationwide and brought these demands to the attention of politicians at the state and federal levels. During periods of social distancing, campaign meetings were held via video chat. Shortly after the revision of the Vocational Training Act (BBiG) was achieved in 2020, massive attacks were launched on the protection rights of apprentices and students under the pretext of the Corona crisis. In recent years, it has been possible to implement demands for training within the economic stimulus package and to achieve further improvements and address key issues in the negotiations for the Alliance for Vocational Training and Further Education. Every year, more than half a million young people begin an apprenticeship in the dual apprenticeship system, marking the beginning of their working lives. In addition, a dual study program has become an established "hybrid" format at the intersection of companies and universities. An apprenticeship forms the foundation for a person's subsequent working life – therefore, it is a crucial phase in their working life for the union. The Corona pandemic had a significant impact on the apprenticeship market. Even those already in training suffered from the consequences of the pandemic. Often, they did not have access to a regular, good vocational training. Together with member unions, the union made every effort to create advisory and support services and to advocate for a Corona protection shield for apprentices in discussions with politicians. In addition, the union developed attractive and needs-based programs to reach out to young people. The union's successful project in the field of training is the Apprenticeship Report.

The "Ausbildungsreport" is the central nationwide study on the quality of vocational training. During the reporting period, a total of 44,487 trainees participated in the surveys. With over 10,000 respondents each year, the "Ausbildungsreport" provides a scientifically sound annual overview of the vocational training landscape, which is widely recognized. In addition to a standardized questionnaire covering the four main topics of "training remuneration," "personal assessment of training quality," "working hours and overtime," and "technical quality of training," the "Ausbildungsreport" also addresses current issues that concern trainees. For example:
*   2018: Working hours in training
*   2019: Training 4.0
*   2020: Trade unions and housing
*   2021: Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, a regular "Ausbildungsreport" could not be published. Instead, a special study was commissioned, focusing on the situation in dual vocational training under COVID-19 conditions ("Corona Training Study").

The union's online consultation and information service on vocational training is the "Dr. Azubi" portal, which is still heavily used. In the first year of the COVID-19 pandemic, more than 1.6 million visitors used this service, doubling the number of visits compared to the period before the pandemic. From the beginning of 2018 to the end of 2021, over 4,500 individual consultations were conducted.

The educational behavior of young people is changing. The number of completed vocational training contracts in dual vocational training and the number of students starting university are increasingly similar. The number of students is at a new high of nearly three million. Wherever the union and its affiliated unions have been present at universities and have provided corresponding services for students, student work has been a resounding success: Since 2009, the number of student members has more than doubled.

With labor and social law information and advice, union and societal events at the university, seminars and networking opportunities for student union members, and the opportunity to get involved in university groups, the offer is very comprehensive. In 2019 alone, the union, together with its affiliated unions, was present at nearly 100 universities, conducting tours, consultations, and activities on campus. Even in the pandemic year of 2020, a similar number of universities were reached.

In 2019, the image and communication concept for student work was redesigned, further increasing the visibility of the target group of students. As a result, all communication materials and the university presence were revised, and new digital and analog communication channels were developed. In addition, a pilot project was launched in selected unions with the aim of further establishing student work as a joint union project.

From 2019, the 26th amendment to the Federal Law on Financial Support for Vocational Training (BAföG) was critically examined, extensive new demands for a fundamental structural reform were discussed and formulated, and an alternative BAföG report was published in 2021. At the same time, the debate about quality standards in dual studies continued, and the demand for an expansion of the scope of the Vocational Training Act (BBiG) was reinforced.

**Solidarity Semester: Student Protest, 2020. Photo: Union**

The field of education has been identified as a future area of union work. The goal is to motivate students to make their own career choices and to actively participate in shaping the union and society. The core of this work is to attract students to the union through appropriate offers, such as in the area of career guidance. In addition, it is an important concern of the union to be perceived as an expert in career guidance, in the area of internships, and as a partner in student representation. To this end, the brochure "Nxt LvL - Your Guide to Career Orientation" was published in 2018, along with accompanying posters for classrooms. This brochure highlights the opportunities available after school as a guide for students. In addition, the union is present at vocational schools with the "Democracy and Participation" project.

In 2020, the concept underwent a comprehensive revision, both in terms of content and design, with a focus on targeting specific audiences. The new slogan, "younited - Your network for training," highlights the union as a powerful network and a platform for participation. This is reflected in the union's presence at events and in the training programs offered for vocational education. Approximately 800 volunteer team members within the union in this area can work together with union members to address key union issues, ranging from 90-minute sessions to full-day projects.

[Image: Vocational school tour - Team Region Süd, Gewerkschaft, NRW. Photo: Gewerkschaft/ Björn Eckert]

For union members and trainees in companies or institutions, the union and trainee representation (JAV) is the primary point of contact for questions related to training and work. Together with the works council or personnel council, the JAV ensures employee participation in training and employment matters. Employee participation is essential for good training conditions. To raise awareness of the elections held every two years and to achieve high voter turnout, the union, in collaboration with its members, develops a unified approach to the election. The materials created provide election committees, trainees, employee representatives, and works councils with an overview of the election process, the first steps after the election, and relevant legal regulations. The JAV portal provides a comprehensive overview of the latest legal information, the fundamentals of the Works Constitution Act, and direct contact information for the union.

The union's educational work is based on a broad understanding of education. This goes beyond traditional schooling and is understood as a lifelong process that enables social action. The union's education center, part of the Bildungswerk Bund in Hattingen (Ruhr), plays a vital role in this work. The center is undergoing renovations, which began in 2021. Our joint union education program is published annually. Over the past four years, we have successfully restructured the union's educational work, focusing on strong collaboration with union members to better integrate the offerings. In particular, the training programs have been expanded and updated.

The union believes that every person in the world has the right to a life free from violence, peace, and self-determination. Global migration flows are expected to increase in the coming years. Not only war and hunger are driving people to leave their homes, but also the changing climate is making parts of the world increasingly difficult to inhabit. In addition, the global struggle for distribution of resources, which has been dramatically exacerbated since the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020, is a major factor. In this regard, the union has been involved in the #LeaveNoOneBehind campaign and has written an open letter to the federal ministries, calling for the immediate evacuation of refugee camps on the EU's external and internal borders, such as those in Greece. Collaboration with other non-governmental organizations is crucial in this area.

The union views anti-racism and anti-discrimination as cross-cutting issues that are integrated into its activities. It is important for the union to oppose the root causes of these anti-democratic social trends and to firmly reject any anti-human and anti-democratic attitudes. The union is committed to active democracy and rejects all forms of group-based hostility, such as racism, antisemitism, nationalism, antigypsyism, sexism, homophobia, and transphobia, as well as any other forms of discrimination.

These issues are particularly addressed in the union's educational work, in various event formats, and in its publications, such as brochures, especially those in the "Blickpunkt" series, which are aimed at multipliers. Publications have been created on topics such as "Identitarian Movement" and "Against All Antisemitism." The union is creating tools to counter the global far-right political climate and the rise of the AfD. Networking, education, and awareness-raising are important factors in strengthening democracy.

The union undertakes numerous tasks, which are continuously expanded in terms of quality and quantity, to effectively reach young people. Of particular note is the cooperation with the union in the "Living Democracy" project. This project develops educational materials, as well as manuals and guidelines, to promote democratic values and attitudes in vocational training. The fight against extremism takes place at both the company level and at the level of external, union-related activities, such as in union committees and bodies. This includes, for example, calls to action, public statements, and motions to union conferences. Various forms of peaceful protest are organized, influencing collective bargaining agreements, creating educational opportunities, and developing materials. Close cooperation and networking with partners are crucial, such as "Gelbe Hand - Don't mess with my friend," the "Information and Documentation Center for Anti-Racism Work" (IDA), and the "Network for Democracy and Courage" (NDC). In 2018, a multiplier training program was launched for full-time and volunteer staff to conduct their own memorial site visits. This training includes a preparatory seminar covering historical context, the importance of "Remembrance and Commemoration" within the union, and pedagogical principles. This is followed by a visit to a memorial site, where the theory of conducting a memorial site visit is put into practice. A follow-up seminar then focuses on the political context of current issues and the development of individual projects in the area of "Remembrance and Commemoration." In 2019, as part of the first union political training program, a visit was made to the Auschwitz concentration camp, and five days were spent at the International Trade Union Training Centre (IJBS) in Oswiecim (Auschwitz). For 2020, a memorial site visit to the Majdanek concentration camp memorial in Lublin was planned. A preparatory seminar for this visit had already taken place in 2019. Due to the pandemic, the memorial site visit had to be cancelled and has not yet been rescheduled. Internationally, the union promotes union-related perspectives on union issues. A key focus of the political (lobbying) work at the European level was the advocacy for an improved EU trade union guarantee within the framework of the "Time for Quality Jobs" campaign of the European Trade Union Confederation (ETUC). Together with the ETUC, (digital) conferences were held, including on the need to better involve young people in the EU recovery program after the Corona pandemic. Within the ETUC itself, there is ongoing work to focus more on union issues and strengthen internal union participation, particularly through the proposal to introduce a union quota at ETUC congresses as part of a union reform. During the 2019 European elections, the union campaign "Europe. Now it's time to do it right!" was expanded to include a union campaign and union-specific demands. Despite the pandemic and the associated suspension of successful union exchanges from March 2020 to November 2021, the exchange with Israel continued through digital educational formats. A key focus was the engagement against anti-Israeli and anti-Semitic campaigns under the motto "Against all anti-Semitism." Summer and autumn academies were used to structure the discussion processes of the previous federal youth conference and to use them for joint position-finding within the union. In 2018 and 2019, the topic of training was discussed in more detail, with a focus in 2018 on the topic of "Training 4.0" and in 2019 on the legal framework, the Vocational Training Act. In 2020, the autumn academy was held digitally for the first time, focusing on the themes of transformation, climate, and justice. All 143 events were attended by more than 60 people from the various union member organizations. The position papers developed from these events were published after being approved by the union's federal executive committee. After years of commitment and pressure on politicians, the union has linked a broad lobbying process from the local to the federal level to amend the Vocational Training Act, under the slogan "Do it now! Right and for everyone - Your upgrade for training!"

In 2017, pressure from trade unions and demands for improvements to the legal framework for vocational training prompted the CDU/CSU-SPD governing coalition to include a revision in the coalition agreement. The union's strategy was based on five key demands. At the federal level, efforts were made to influence the various political parties (Jusos, the Green Party's union wing, the Left Party's union wing, Junge CDA, and Julis). Furthermore, broad support for the union's demands was secured through the German Federation of Trade Unions and affiliated unions. Discussions were held with the federal parties, and the BBiG demands were presented through media campaigns. When the parliamentary committee on education, research, and technological assessment held a hearing on the BBiG, a union representative was invited as an expert. Simultaneously, a live-streamed political talk show on the BBiG was broadcast on social media, and public viewing events were organized across the country to encourage participation from young people. A BBiG campaign was held in Berlin. Photo: Union/Jörg Farys.

The union emphasized unity and diversity. While the federal level organized and coordinated activities to create a unified external image, the union leveraged its local presence to directly advocate for these demands through electoral districts. Local engagement was crucial. Whether through creative public actions and discussion forums, addressing vocational training issues in company meetings, youth gatherings, and training sessions, joint works council conferences, company visits with political guests, regional city card campaigns, vocational school tours, direct outreach in constituency offices, BBiG campaign posters, podcasts, and many other initiatives, the union made a strong local impact. It became clear that vocational training is not a boring topic, but one that directly impacts the daily lives of trainees, dual students, and union and trainee representatives. The three levels of action – company policy, collective bargaining, and social policy – were integrated, and efforts were focused on improving the quality of vocational training at all levels. This decentralized approach proved effective. The Vocational Training Modernization Act (BBiMoG), passed by the Bundestag and concluding the revision of the BBiG, includes significant improvements for which there had been a long struggle. It strengthens vocational training and education in Germany. However, the union still sees a need for action in certain areas. The union's participation-oriented campaign for the 2021 federal election was called "PRESS START - It's about our NOW." The union is calling for concrete action from politicians. It's time to stop constantly postponing things to tomorrow, the day after, or the next life. The campaign was successful because it provided opportunities for local adaptation of the themes within the union's youth and union structures, as well as for the diverse realities of the eight member unions. In the year of the federal election, the nine regional union conferences and the 21st national union conference also took place, and the campaign was integrated with these conferences, as it was four years earlier. Union politics. National Union Conference, 2021. Photo: Union/Jörg Farys.

Design elements, tools, and soundbites (reducing complex topics to short, concise statements) were used to create a unified image and collective impact. To reach union members despite the "digital fatigue" and lack of social interaction during the COVID-19 crisis, and to encourage active participation and a sense of community, the campaign utilized new formats and opportunities in the digital space. Important union demands, such as the publicly funded vocational training guarantee, were successfully included in the election programs of the SPD, the Green Party, and the Left Party. In addition to addressing politicians at the federal and state levels, the focus of the lobbying efforts was on decentralized, COVID-compliant constituency meetings. These meetings were held across the country to discuss the union's demands. A digital candidate tool was developed to make the support for these demands visible on the website and to consolidate it. For the union and its members, the priority was to activate volunteer colleagues in the companies and to engage in the federal election campaign with youth policy demands.

Young employees in companies were encouraged to vote and to understand the political connections between workplace realities and trade union policies. To achieve this, modules were developed for trade union and apprentice meetings, university groups, and local committees, and made available interactively. On the other hand, politicians were made aware of the problems faced by young workers, trainees, and students, and of the trade union's political demands. The campaign was driven by young people through targeted campaign elements such as a meme generator, cool giveaways like tattoos and caps, or a demands magazine. An activity guide simplified participation. A campaign song and numerous templates for adapting to local issues made it possible to create an appealing and trade union-friendly presence. Even during the pandemic, a political live talk allowed for a varied and interactive discussion with leading candidates and colleagues. The talk was broadcast live, while colleagues met in the trade union for a public viewing event, and some even invited local election candidates. The reach was significantly increased through quizzes, Instagram stories, videos featuring volunteers, and internet trends like memes (creative, often humorous images or videos) and GIFs (animated images). A summary of the parties' programs was used to assess their positions on the trade union's political demands.

**European and International Trade Union Work**

**Economic Recovery Programs (Recovery, Green Deal)**

In recent years, a large number of political initiatives have been adopted at the EU level, in which the core demand of the trade union for increased public investment has been taken up by politicians. The President of the Commission, Ursula von der Leyen, has declared the European Green Deal a priority for the current legislative period, and EU institutions have adopted an economic recovery package of 750 billion euros, financed through the issuance of common debt. With the Green Deal, the European Commission has presented an ambitious program. Europe is to become climate-neutral by 2050, making it the first continent to do so. To achieve this, the Commission has presented a comprehensive program of measures that will be implemented in the coming years. This initiative will have a significant impact on all sectors of the economy, employment, and society in Europe, and will shape the structural change. Overall, EU economic policy has developed in a direction that takes the trade union's demands for a "Just Transition" and increased public investment seriously. The trade union actively participated in the political decision-making process regarding the EU recovery package and the Green Deal. The trade union advocated for the necessary economic stabilization measures to be used in a way that promotes transformation, creating the conditions for a fair and sustainable modernization, and achieving climate goals while considering decent work and inclusive prosperity. The position paper "Requirements for a solidarity-based and sustainable EU recovery program" and the trade union brochure "Solidarity is not a solo act! Trade union positions for the economic recovery in the European Union" assessed and commented on the relevant draft regulations of the EU recovery package. These two documents also form the basis for extensive political lobbying on this issue. While generally supportive, the trade union clearly stated in this position that there is an urgent need for improvement in the draft laws, particularly regarding the level of investment, the link between the new EU recovery fund and the European Semester, the criteria for decent work, and the involvement of social partners. Progress has been made in the latter area. Currently, discussions are underway with representatives of the Federal Ministry of Finance to explore how a political steering structure can be created in the implementation of the German recovery plan, in which the positions of social partners and other relevant stakeholders are adequately considered.

The union has initiated a broad public discussion about a shift in EU economic policy through various events. In 2019 and 2021, European economic policy was a key focus of the "Day for Progressive Economic Policy," a major public international conference organized by the union, together with the Friedrich-Ebert Foundation (FES), the Institute for Macroeconomics and Business Cycle Research (IMK), and other partners. The conference "No Green Deal Without a Social Deal," organized by the union in cooperation with FES for German and European unions, focused on the link between the EU recovery package and the Green Deal. One outcome of this event is the brochure "The socio-ecological transformation of the European economy: Union perspectives," published by FES. In a series of three events with X, the X union, and FES, titled "Towards a United States of Europe? Guiding principles for a sustainable European economic policy," the union sparked a critical public discussion about the advantages and disadvantages of deepening EU economic policy. In the context of negotiations on the EU's multi-year financial framework, the union, together with partners, organized a public panel discussion ("Social Europe - who will pay for it?") with then-Federal Minister of Finance Olaf Scholz and former EU Commissioner for Budget and Administration Günther Oettinger, focusing on the union's reform proposals.

**Humane and Sustainable Supply Chains**
With the passage of the Supply Chain Due Diligence Act by the German Bundestag in June 2021, the union and its member unions achieved a very important milestone for humane and sustainable supply chains. The path to the passage of the law was marked by persistent efforts to influence policymakers to establish binding rules for the protection of human rights throughout global value chains. From the beginning, the union had serious doubts about the effectiveness of the voluntary self-commitments of companies. Therefore, the review of the implementation of these self-commitments, as agreed in the 2018 coalition agreement, and the possibility of a legislative initiative at the national and European level in the event of non-compliance were welcomed. The union critically monitored the surveys of companies conducted in 2019 and 2020 to verify the self-commitments, ensuring that the results reflected the actual implementation of human rights due diligence obligations. The sobering result of the survey, that only 16 percent of the surveyed companies were fulfilling their self-commitments, was not surprising. Consequently, the German government had to take legislative action. Although the National Action Plan provided a good framework for legislation, there was a difficult struggle between the Federal Ministers of Labor and Social Affairs and the Federal Minister for Economic Affairs. The Ministry of Economic Affairs did not miss any opportunity to push for the weakest possible wording of the law. During this phase, it was crucial that the union, together with a broad alliance of church organizations, human rights organizations, development organizations, and environmental protection organizations, exerted public pressure to achieve the strongest possible law. The final result was a compromise that was improved during the Bundestag debates and, overall, represents a success for the union and civil society. This law protects human rights, as enshrined in the core labor standards of the International Labour Organization (ILO) and the two international covenants on civil and political rights, as well as on economic, social, and cultural rights, throughout global value chains. At the same time, it marks a paradigm shift, replacing voluntary self-commitments with a necessary legal obligation. From 2023, the protection of human rights must be integrated into the risk management systems of companies. The interests of employees along the value chain, as well as other affected parties, must be adequately considered in this process.

Simultaneously with the Supply Chain Act, the German Works Constitution Act was amended. This means that works councils will be more involved in human rights risk management, and for the first time, they will have a legal basis to address working conditions in global value chains.

**European Labor Market and Social Policy / Social Europe**

Significant developments took place in European labor market and social policy during the reporting period. Since the proclamation of the European Pillar of Social Rights (EPSR) in 2007, the union has consistently advocated for translating the non-binding principles into legally binding acts. Concrete initiatives from the European Commission to implement the EPSR, such as the directive on work-life balance, the directive on transparent and predictable working conditions, and the directive on adequate minimum wages, were negotiated and, in some cases, adopted.

In 2021, the EU Commission presented its Action Plan for implementing the EPSR, outlining the labor market and social policy agenda for the coming years. However, it falls short of adequately addressing the demand for more legally binding initiatives.

Important progress was made in the area of worker representation during the reporting period. Following the revision of the Posted Workers Directive in 2018, a compromise was reached on the European Road Transport Package in 2020 after difficult negotiations. The European institutions also agreed to establish a European Labour Authority, which is intended to promote greater fairness in the European labor market.

No agreement has yet been reached on the revision of the rules for coordinating social security systems (Regulation 883/2004). Furthermore, negotiations continued during the reporting period on the realignment of the European Social Fund (ESF) and the legal framework for the next funding period, which will determine the future financial resources for social Europe.

In 2019, elections were held for the European Parliament. Voter turnout in Europe was 51 percent, and in Germany, it was 61 percent, a high level for many years. The union actively participated with a pro-European campaign, which was presented under the title "What does Europe have to do with me?" highlighting the benefits that the European Union brings to the everyday lives of people. However, it also critically analyzed areas where improvements are needed: "Europe. Let's get it right!".

The German Council Presidency, which took place in the second half of 2020 under the motto "Together. Making Europe strong again," was largely focused on addressing the COVID-19 crisis. The union closely followed these developments and advocated for the interests of workers.

The proclamation of the European Pillar of Social Rights in 2017 at the Gothenburg summit was an important step that provided an initial political guideline for the further development of the social dimension of Europe. The union reaffirmed its demand that these principles be translated into legally binding acts and put forward concrete proposals.

To protect European workers, increased European coordination and the creation of a common framework are needed to bring the 27 different national systems closer together through minimum standards. The goal should be to offer inclusive working conditions for European workers by creating EU-wide legally binding minimum standards for social security, national unemployment insurance, and an EU framework directive on minimum wages.

These proposals were reflected not only in the programs of several parties in the European elections but also in the agenda of the German Council Presidency. The demand for more binding measures was also reflected in some areas of the EU Commission's Action Plan for implementing the European Pillar of Social Rights. This Action Plan forms the core of the social and labor market policy agenda for the coming years, aiming for an "economy at the service of people."

The union actively supported the German EU Council Presidency through position papers, events, and expert discussions. The "Demands to the German EU Council Presidency" document outlined the core demands of the union, and the introduction of the EU program for financing short-time work schemes (SURE) was supported.

The union also put pressure on the government to ensure that a European program for funding short-time work could not replace the planned EU unemployment insurance scheme. The union contributed to the preparation of the Council's conclusions on issues such as adequate minimum income and improving working conditions for mobile workers through publications, expert discussions, and events. In the area of equality, the union called on the German government to actively promote gender equality between women and men at the European level. This call was reflected in the two gender equality priorities of the Council presidency: 1. Promoting gender equality between women and men in the labor market, and 2. Protecting women from violence. The union made clear demands in both areas and also pointed out which issues were missing from the gender equality agenda for the Council presidency. After the then-designated EU Commission President Ursula von der Leyen announced in her inaugural speech in September 2020 that she would quickly propose a framework for European minimum wages, the union accompanied the two subsequent social partner consultations at the X level. In connection with the then-presented draft directive on adequate minimum wages in the European Union, numerous consultations took place with the union, and the union engaged in lobbying through discussions at the political level, as well as through events and publications related to the initiative. With the Council recommendation "Access to social protection for all workers," the EU Commission launched a formally weak but substantively promising initiative to improve the social security of employees and self-employed individuals in the EU. The X then launched its own initiative, "SociALL," which aims to enhance the Commission's proposal through evaluations and recommendations from the X-member unions in EU member states. The union was involved in this project. In addition to supporting legislative processes, the union advocated for the introduction of further social minimum standards. Together with the X, it advocated for the introduction of an EU framework directive for minimum standards in basic income support. The union coordinated the European project EMIN (European Minimum Income Network) in Germany, which aims to reduce poverty in Europe. After the project was completed, the union, together with the National Poverty Conference (NAK), commissioned a scientific study, concretized the demands in the context of statements and position papers, and organized events and expert discussions on the topic. Basic income support was a key focus of the German EU Council presidency and was supported by Council conclusions, which, among other things, called on the European Commission to propose a corresponding initiative. The European Commission is likely to only comply with this request in 2022 by presenting a (legally non-binding) Council recommendation. In cooperation with the Austrian unions, the union also developed a concept for minimum standards for national unemployment insurance systems and jointly advocated for this initiative. While gender equality between women and men has been a fundamental principle of the European Union from the beginning, it has not yet been fully realized. Women in Europe are still disadvantaged compared to men - from gender-based violence to differences in employment, pay, and pension security. The current European Strategy for Gender Equality (2020-2025) sets out key measures to address these gaps. Furthermore, the European Commission is committed to ensuring gender mainstreaming - i.e., integrating the gender perspective into all policy areas of the EU - with the help of a task force on gender equality policy. Promoting gender equality between women and men in the labor market and the rights of women in society are also priorities in the union's lobbying efforts.

Key equality issues during the reporting period included the call for a new EU strategy on gender equality, the directive on work-life balance for parents and caregivers, the proposal for an EU pay transparency directive, and the fight against gender-based violence and harassment, particularly the ratification of the Istanbul Convention and the authorization for EU member states to ratify ILO Convention 190. One measure to implement the European Pillar of Social Rights was the directive on work-life balance for working parents and caregivers. It aims to modernize the EU's legal framework in the areas of parental and care leave, as well as flexible working arrangements. In April 2019, the union, together with other organizations, publicly advocated for a position and criticized the significant weakening of the content during the legislative process. The directive came into force in July 2019. In March 2021, the EU Commission presented a proposal for a directive on pay transparency, which the union welcomed from a trade union perspective. The union supported this progressive proposal in its statement and contributed improvement suggestions to the European legislative process. On June 18, 2021, the union called on the European Parliament: "Equal pay needs trade unions!" Through an online and in-person flash mob, unions across Europe demonstrated their support; the union supported this action with a video "Stand up for equal pay." GENDER PAY GAP We will NOT wait 101 years for equal pay!! In European occupational safety policy, the protection of employees from carcinogenic substances was a priority. The union advocated at various levels to ensure that the four revisions of the carcinogens directive resulted in effective protection for employees. By including 27 toxic substances in the scope of the directive, millions of employees can now be effectively protected from cancer-related illnesses at work. In addition, three further annexes to occupational safety directives were revised, also at the urging of the union, bringing tangible improvements in the areas of biological agents and personal protective equipment. European and International Union Work The union has also been strongly committed to a new EU strategy in the area of occupational health and safety. Ultimately, the European Commission presented a new strategic framework in June 2021, which identifies important areas of action for unions, such as improving the workplace and screen directive. During the reporting period, the union accompanied several EU-level labor law legislative processes and the implementation of EU regulations into German law. The union was successfully involved in the implementation of the EU directive on the protection of trade secrets, adopted in 2016. Through intensive involvement in the legislative process (2018-2019), the union was able to achieve an exception to the strict rules on the protection of secrets for the exchange of information and knowledge in collective and individual employment relationships. Together with the X, the union accompanied the legislative processes for the adoption of the EU-wide rules for the protection of whistleblowers (EU Whistleblower Directive) and the directive to protect employees through transparent and reliable working conditions, including a duty for employers to document working conditions (EU Working Conditions Directive). Approximately 18 million employees in the European Union work in other member states. In many industries, cross-border mobile workers are particularly affected by precarious employment conditions and wage and social dumping. The control and enforcement of labor and social law often end at national borders. An important success for the union at the European level was the conclusion of the negotiations on the revision of the Posted Workers Directive. The directive came into force on July 30, 2018. The union had intensively accompanied the trilogue negotiations through continuous lobbying. Given the difficult framework conditions, the result of the revision of the Posted Workers Directive is to be expressly welcomed from the union's point of view.

Even though the new regulations have not yet fully achieved the principle of "equal pay for equal work in the same place" for European and international trade union work, important steps have been taken to promote equality for posted workers. Unfortunately, the implementation of the Posted Workers Directive in Germany has lagged far behind the possibilities offered by the directive. The trade union also strongly criticized the provisions that exempt the new, improved regulations from applying to the transport sector. As part of the European Transport Package, sector-specific regulations were adopted in early July 2020 after lengthy negotiations. The compromise reached includes important demands of the trade union, which ensure adequate rest periods for drivers, strengthen prohibitions on overnight stays at rest areas, and facilitate the possibility of returning to their home countries. Further planned deteriorations in working conditions, such as increased flexibility in driving times and a complete liberalization of the cabotage market, have been prevented. The Posted Workers Directive will now not, as originally proposed by the Commission, be suspended regularly for a fixed number of days per month and per journey, but will be applied in cases of journeys that are linked to international transport. Since 2016, the trade union has been actively involved in the revision of EU Regulations 883/2004 and Implementing Regulation 987/2009, in order to achieve better social security protection for workers who are mobile across borders. More information on this can be found in section F under the heading "Labor and Social Law." The trade union also supports the Commission's plans to introduce a European Social Security Number/Card. In the medium term, the establishment of a real-time register will be necessary as part of the digital data exchange within the EU. The trade union will therefore continue to use its opportunities to exert political influence in order to achieve these goals and thus a successful revision of the regulations. The trade union has actively followed the process of establishing a European Labour Authority (ELA). The ELA is intended to promote fairness in the European labor market by supporting trade unions and combating abuse across borders. The trade union had already actively participated in the debate on the design of the ELA through events, discussions, and participation in the "No to Social Dumping" campaign. From the trade union's point of view, the establishment of the ELA is to be welcomed, but the trade union has in particular called for the authority to have more powers in the areas of inspections and enforcement. After the adoption of the regulation establishing the ELA, the trade union, together with [Organization X], has closely followed the establishment and development of the ELA. Representatives of [Organization X] and the trade union are represented in the ELA bodies. In 2018, the European Commission presented the legislative package on the EU structural funds, including the European Social Fund Plus (ESF+) for the new funding period 2021-2027. The trade union closely followed the subsequent negotiations on the design of the funds and the allocation of funds in the EU budget until their completion (end of 2020). Together with the Federal Association of Free Welfare Organizations (BAG FW), the trade union strongly opposed a planned budget cut of 29 percent for Germany, the reduction of co-financing rates, and the complexity of the indicators. Through lobbying, the trade union, together with the BAG FW, was able to contribute to ensuring that budget cuts were mitigated, especially for the transition regions (eastern Germany), and that binding funding was secured for trade union-strategically relevant projects, such as those under the Social Partnership Directive. In addition, the trade union has presented the participation of social partners under the Social Partnership Directive as a success model at both the German and European levels. In parallel with and following the negotiations at the European level, the trade union also actively participated in the consultation processes of the German government in preparation for the new funding period at the federal and state levels.

European and International Trade Union Work
European and International Trade Union Work
[Page Number]
[Internal Code]
[Internal Code]
Organizational Policy
Project "Trade Union 2030 - The Future of the Trade Union"
The trade union is working closely with its members to shape the profound transformation of our trade union, economy, and society in the interests of workers.

The union brings together the positions of the various unions and, in the spirit of a unified union, is politically effective at all levels. Modern communication allows the union to reach many people. Its strength makes it the primary point of contact for politics and an important partner for civil society. The development of membership, the economic transformation, and the changes in industries and value chains pose new challenges for the union and its affiliated unions. Through the "Union 2030" future process, which began in September 2020, we are developing common conceptual solutions to these challenges. The chairpersons oversee the project, setting goals, supporting the process, and prioritizing areas and measures. The main goal of the process is to make the union future-proof by developing a clear, shared vision of how the union works with its affiliated unions and by improving cooperation within the union and across its organizational levels. The process aims to create synergies and added value for the affiliated unions and the union as a whole, and to increase the overall effectiveness of the union movement. Internally, the union is professionalizing and streamlining its operations, which further strengthens its ability to campaign at all political levels. Externally, the services for members are being expanded, for example, by strengthening digital communication. Closer cooperation in strategically important areas will improve member engagement, acquisition, and retention. This is being addressed in three sub-projects, with initial positive results:

Sub-project "Digitalization/IT": This project explores how digitalization and a robust IT infrastructure can sustainably strengthen the work of the unions. This includes topics such as machine learning/artificial intelligence, and how member engagement, acquisition, and retention can be improved through the use of existing data. It also examines how legal protection services, a key member benefit, can be made more effective through digital case management. Future-proof digital event solutions, as well as Microsoft 365 and cloud solutions, are also part of the project.

Sub-project "Education/Union": The core question of this sub-project is how unions can continue to offer attractive programs for their members in a changing educational landscape. This includes developing joint training programs for speakers, using a unified digital learning platform, and implementing joint registration and procurement management for union activities.

Sub-project "Social Media": This project focuses on how unions can support each other internally in their social media activities to reach their target groups more quickly and effectively. This includes sharing information about union-friendly online service providers and exploring opportunities for joint training in community management or content creation for specific areas.

The participation of affiliated unions may vary in the individual sub-projects, depending on the relevance of the specific topic to the organization. In addition to the chairpersons, the relevant department heads and colleagues from the union's education and training center and legal protection services are involved. This process is complemented by a review of tasks within the union itself, including the administration and various departments. This review takes into account positive experiences and examines how tasks may change in the future and what consequences this has for the organization of work and the training of employees. It also explores how the processes being implemented to digitize internal operations (e.g., in the areas of personnel and financial processes or user support in IT) can provide guidance for further concrete changes.

Digital Strategy: During the reporting period, the union was intensively involved in the preparatory work for a digital strategy to ensure the future viability of the union in terms of hardware and software, and to ensure modern digital processes. As a first step, the process of transitioning to Microsoft 365 was initiated to enable collaborative work across all levels. In view of the restrictions imposed by the pandemic, the digital and more mobile way of working within the union was significantly expanded. The technical infrastructure and the necessary skills at all levels were expanded.

Union Internal: Networking Forum, Membership Development: The "Networking Forum for Membership Development," where colleagues responsible for the topic from the management boards of the affiliated unions can exchange ideas and learn from each other, took place three times during the reporting period. Topics discussed included "member communication and smartphones," "big data and its effects and opportunities for union work," "reaching out to members and non-members," and "the impact of the Corona crisis on union membership work."

Organizational Relations between Unions: Differences between unions in questions of organizational boundaries are usually resolved bilaterally. Only a very small number of conflicts need to be resolved through a mediation or union procedure. During the reporting period, there was only one conflict in the area of leisure facilities/catering, which could be settled through a mediation procedure within the union.

Union Representation in the Union's Full-Time Elected Offices: The 21st Ordinary General Assembly of the Union adopted a motion to amend the union's statutes, according to which, in the union's full-time elected offices (executive board, district chairpersons and deputy district chairpersons, regional managers), the proportion of union members must correspond to the proportion of all female union members at the respective level of election. The statutory goal was achieved in the elections for district chairpersons, deputy district chairpersons, and regional managers. In only one district were only two union representatives nominated for the election as regional managers, instead of the planned three. The union has granted a temporary exemption for this.

International Workers' Day: Digital Livestreams 2020 & 2021:

IN A WORD: Singer DOTA, Amnesty International General Secretary Markus Beeko on the topic of human rights, the right to work worldwide, and threatened union members. Talk round on union issues with (from left to right): Ulrich Khuon (President of the German Stage Association), Isabell Senff (X), Reiner Hoffmann (Union Chairman), Timm Steinborn (Union, moderator). Joint virtual "May Day speech" by the Executive Board. Digital formats in Corona times. May Day: Due to the Corona pandemic, public events for May Day in 2020 and 2021 could not take place or could only take place with hygiene measures. Therefore, a comprehensive digital program was developed and broadcast live in both years. This included many voices and contributions from the union and the affiliated unions, as well as music, cabaret, experts from Amnesty International, a sociologist, virtual choirs, poetry slams, and more. The livestream in 2020, which was broadcast on the union's Facebook page, the union's YouTube channel, and the union's website, reached a large audience:
* 221,000 viewers on the Facebook page and YouTube channel of the union.
* 24,000 views of program content on the union's website.
* 64,000 views of program content on other websites/Facebook pages.
* 45,000 viewers via regional radio stations (estimated based on media data).
* 354,000 viewers in total.
Prior to May Day, the union called on people to publish messages of solidarity, posts, and tweets using the hashtag #SolidarischNichtAlleine (Solidarity, Not Alone). A selection of almost 10,000 of these contributions was published by the union on a "SocialWall." Posts and tweets with the hashtag #SolidarischNichtAlleine reached a total of 16.1 million users in the week before and on May 1st. In 2021, many local events could again take place, albeit with hygiene measures. "Networks of Solidarity" were established nationwide and continued with the central live broadcast. There were approximately 70,000 live viewers in total. 3.6 million people were reached on social media with the hashtag #SolidaritaetlstZukunft (Solidarity for the Future).

Union Internal: A Network of Solidarity: Action for May 1, 2021, in Idar-Oberstein, Photo: Union. Action for May 1, 2021, in Halle/Saale, Photo: Union. In the lead-up to the 2021 German federal election, the union launched a campaign under the slogan "Fairness in Action." Through numerous activities, materials, and strong online communication, the union clearly articulated the interests of workers. Hundreds of events took place across all union locals, often in collaboration with member unions. There were discussions, speed-dating events, "Vote for Me" campaigns, and other formats featuring candidates for the Bundestag (German parliament). In an online "election check," the union compared the positions of different parties on issues such as labor, education, participation, care, pensions, housing, the state, and climate, against its own demands. Highlights included two nationwide action days shortly before the election: one focused on equality, and another for commuters, addressing the issue of "strong pensions."

Communication / Intranet / Action Platform: In 2020, the union successfully completed the relaunch of its intranet and the cross-union action platform (aktionintern.dgb.de). The relaunch included a complete technical overhaul using an updated content management system (the current version of union.CMS), a new design, a new editorial structure, and the integration of the union's training program into both platforms. The second phase of the intranet relaunch was completed at the end of 2021. Now, for the first time, union volunteers can also access parts of the union intranet/action platform. The involvement of union volunteers in internal union communication will continue in 2022. The union's group platform currently supports over 230 groups, successfully facilitating decentralized, self-organized digital communication within the union. The reach of the action platform among union members is constantly growing. The annual "Union Communication Strategies" forum is an offering for full-time colleagues from member unions and the union in the communications area. This two-day event, which provides a platform for exchange and insights into current communication developments, has become a regular fixture. The number of participants has increased year after year, and now exceeds 100. The two forums in 2020 and 2021 were held as video conferences due to the COVID-19 pandemic. "Einblick" is the central newsletter of the union and is an important communication channel for our political positions and demands, both internally and externally. It continues to be published monthly in print and regularly as an online newsletter. Approximately 4,000 print subscriptions are sent out monthly. The online newsletter now reaches over 10,100 subscribers (as of September 30, 2021), and the number is continuing to grow. The "Einblick" election graphics ("How did union members vote?") after state and federal elections are widely recognized, appreciated, and reproduced by unions and the public. Since May 2021, the texts in "Einblick" have been even more focused and clear in conveying our messages to our full-time and volunteer staff, politicians, and the public. The union's debate platform, Gegenblende, published contributions from prominent union leaders, scientists, and authors on key political, economic, and union-related topics during the reporting period. Since 2020, there has also been a Gegenblende podcast, which has been released several times a month on various platforms (iTunes, Spotify). Guests included union president Reiner Hoffmann, union board member Stefan Körzell, taz journalist Ulrike Herrmann, and author Renee Zucker. Several contributions focused on the COVID-19 pandemic and its consequences for the union. Union Representation: During the reporting period, the union's federal and European affairs offices served as a "bridge" between the union and the political institutions of the executive and legislative branches, as well as with political parties and organizations, and vice versa. In federal politics, the union closely monitored the Merkel IV government (CDU/CSU and SPD), the Bundestag, and the Bundesrat (the second parliamentary chamber) in all major reforms.

The list of reforms proposed by the Grand Coalition government was extensive. In the first year and a half, many union demands were implemented at a rapid pace, including stabilizing pension levels, restoring parity in the statutory health insurance system, introducing a basic pension, the "Future of Work" law, and laws related to the coal industry's structural transformation. In the latter part of the period, federal legislation was overshadowed by the management of the COVID-19 crisis. In the spring of 2020, all stakeholders entered an unprecedented crisis mode. The health, economic, and social situation associated with the COVID-19 pandemic impacted virtually every aspect of life and work. Governments and parliaments made decisions of enormous significance at a rapid pace, which the union assessed and addressed with numerous proposals for improvements. These included short-time work benefits, social and economic relief measures, health and safety protections, the federal government's and the European Union's economic stimulus programs, bonuses and tax-free bonuses for particularly affected colleagues, a support program for trainees and apprentices, the extension of parental leave, and, importantly, the end of exploitative working conditions in the meat processing industry. In 2020 and 2021, in addition to the pandemic response, further proposals from the coalition agreement were implemented, such as the law on due diligence obligations in supply chains and the federal union's equality initiatives. In European policy, the activities of the European Commission under Juncker (2014-2017) and von der Leyen (since 2019), the European Parliament, and the European Council were followed closely in all legislative proposals relevant to the union. The last two years of the Juncker Commission were characterized by the implementation of the European Pillar of Social Rights, including transparent and reliable working conditions, the establishment of a European Labour Authority (ELA), access to social protection for workers and the self-employed, and the coordination of social security systems (cross-border workers). Furthermore, strengthening the European Social Dialogue, the mobility pact, the design of the European Social Fund (ESF+), and employee co-determination (internal union activities related to pre-insolvency restructuring and company law) played an important role. A defining event in 2019 was the European elections in May. In preparation, the union's European policy department analyzed the election programs of German and democratic parties in a comparative overview, linking them to the union's demands on the parties. The union's meeting was held in Brussels in November 2019 and included numerous high-level discussions with Members of the European Parliament and senior Commission officials. In the early stages of the von der Leyen Commission, negotiations on the EU budget for 2021-2027 (MFF) were disrupted by the pandemic response, which included joint EU borrowing and the NextGenerationEU recovery instrument, marking a turning point in European economic and financial policy. This period also included initiatives in areas such as artificial intelligence, platform work, work-life balance, and the cancer directive. In the second half of 2020, Germany held the Council Presidency. This was reflected in the agenda, which included the European minimum wage, the framework directive on employee co-determination, and the management of Brexit. In 2021, the focus of the union's advocacy efforts was on ongoing initiatives such as the European minimum wage and the coordination of social security systems, supplemented by initiatives on pay transparency, digital markets and services, sustainable corporate governance, the EU industrial strategy, micro-credentials (lifelong learning), and the EU "Fit for 55" climate package. Within the framework of the Action Plan for the European Pillar of Social Rights and the Conference on the Future of Europe, the union also provided important impetus for the future of the European Semester and the reform of fiscal rules, a reform of state aid law, a European framework for national social security systems, and a European social security number.

[Image description: A photo shows portraits displayed on the glass facade of the Ruhrfestspielhaus, depicting people who were unable to attend the festival in 2020 due to the pandemic-related cancellation. Photo: Sandy Klein]

Ruhrfestspiele: The Ruhrfestspiele have been held since 1946 and enjoy a reputation that extends far beyond Recklinghausen.

The shareholders of Ruhrfestspiele Recklinghausen GmbH are the city of Recklinghausen and VTG Gewerkschaft mbH, each holding 50 percent. In 2018, coal mining ended in the Ruhr region. This marked a new chapter for the region and its people. However, this did not undermine the founding myth of Ruhrfestspiele (RFS), which emphasizes solidarity and responsibility among people. At the same time, there was a change in leadership at RFS. In the 2019 season, Olaf Kröck succeeded Frank Hoffmann, who had led the festival for 14 years. The 2018 season featured major names from Hollywood, such as John Malkovich and Bill Murray. However, the festival also addressed the then-current domestic political debate on migration from Southeast Europe under the theme of "Homeland." During his first season in 2019, under the theme of "Poetry and Politics," the new artistic director, Kröck, embraced the political aspect and immediately addressed the expectation that he would repoliticize RFS. For example, the premiere of "The Holy Brotherhood," a novel by Jean Raspail, explored the susceptibility of a society and the difficulties in dealing with those who hold different views. The production distorted the original political content of the novel. The festival addressed the regional and international changes in work and society through artistic expression. This was evident in new dialogue formats under the title "Take a Stand," which were held in cooperation with the local trade union. RFS became increasingly focused on participation, regional relevance, and concrete issues. High audience numbers and extensive media coverage were a welcome confirmation of this new direction.

**Trade Union Internal**

The 2020 Ruhrfestspiele were held under the theme of "Power and Compassion." However, they were also heavily impacted by the pandemic. The regular stage program was canceled. This also affected the central memorial event organized by the trade union to commemorate the 75th anniversary of the liberation from fascism on May 8th, which the trade union had designed and would have implemented in collaboration with Ruhrfestspiele. Nevertheless, RFS managed to create some artistic highlights. Within the limitations, theater education projects were carried out with children, young people, and trainees. This was a conscious effort to counter the pandemic-related isolation. One such project was the "Inside Out Project," which was extended beyond the festival period. Participants and guests of Ruhrfestspiele created photographic self-portraits and attached them to the facade of the festival building. Based on the experiences from the "Corona Season 2020," the 2021 festival was planned digitally, hybridly, and analogously under the theme of "Utopia and Disquiet." While performances in front of an audience were initially prohibited due to the pandemic, Ruhrfestspiele was eventually able to take place in all three formats. After the situation eased, analog performances were also possible during the last two weeks. The artistic productions were each characterized by their intensity and authenticity. Notable productions included "Working Women," "A Woman Flees from a Message," and "The Alan Turing File." On May 8th, at the initiative of the trade union, author Anne Weber gave a digital reading from her book "Annette, a Heroine Epic," for which she had received the German Book Prize the previous year. The book tells the story of the real-life resistance fighter Anne Beaumanoir and pays tribute to her political commitment against fascism and injustice, raising questions relevant to today. Even under difficult conditions, RFS demonstrated that it is in tune with the times. The digital format opened up new, forward-looking spaces that can reach new audiences when used effectively.

**Trade Union Internal**

The Trade Union Education Center (Gewerkschaft Bildungswerk e.V.) aims to promote trade union and adult education in Germany and abroad. This goal is achieved through the operation of institutions and the implementation of events, conferences, projects, and other activities that promote education. Funding comes from the trade union, course fees, and third-party funds from public funding bodies. The Trade Union Education Center is celebrating its 50th anniversary in 2022. The highest body of the Trade Union Education Center is the general assembly. The responsible management of the association is entrusted to the board, which consists of three members. During the reporting period, Elke Hannack, the deputy chair of the trade union, served as chair of the board.

The deputy board members were Stefan Körzell and Anja Piel, members of the executive committee of the union. Anja Piel succeeded Annelie Buntenbach in October 2020 and was elected to the board. Claudia Meyer served as managing director from September 2011, and Annika Wünsche became the new deputy managing director in January 2021, managing the affairs of the association. Since the end of 2018, the coordination of union education has been handled by a dedicated department within the Gewerkschaft Bildungswerk e.V. at its new location in Berlin. This was in line with the strategic direction, which since 2012 has aimed to strengthen the connection between all educational activities and the union, and to increase coordination of union education with member unions. During the reporting period, the Gewerkschaft Bildungswerk e.V. closely supported the initiatives outlined in the leading proposal A001 2018. The coordination office facilitated communication between the union's teams and the political education department, which developed and implemented an educational and exchange program called "Summer and Winter Workshops" for the volunteer members of the union's local and regional associations. In collaboration with the union's education policy and training department, the coordination office relaunched the "Union Education Focus" program during the reporting period. The education platform provides educational materials and methodological suggestions on topics such as housing and union membership, for union education activities across all organizational levels of the union and its member unions. Another focus on the topic of digitalization will be completed and published in mid-2022. Since 2019, the coordination office has also planned and organized cooperative events such as the Schöneberger Forum and the temporary employment conference in close collaboration with the specialized departments of the union. The coordination of union education with the education representatives of the member unions was significantly influenced by the effects of the Corona pandemic since 2020, and focused on topics such as marketing, digital education, and union education centers. This was also reflected in the theme of union education within the "Union 2030" strategy process, which was driven by the chairpersons of the union and its member unions. In this context, the Gewerkschaft Bildungswerk e.V. developed a learning platform with the aim of enabling the exchange of digital educational formats between the union's educational institutions. In this context, the project "Democracy is not a solo endeavor - Network of providers of political education in the union" was initiated, which provides for close cooperation with the member unions and the regional educational institutions of the union. This involved an investigation and assessment of outreach and workplace-based (union) political education programs, and the development and expansion of programs in companies to strengthen a democratic mindset among employees. Other new cooperative projects between the department and the union that were launched during the reporting period include: + What is the value of women's work? - Economic independence! (Phase IV, 2020-2023) + Shaping the balance between family and work! + Learning from the crisis: Nothing works without balance! Addressing challenges together, strengthening, qualifying, and networking works councils and employee representatives! (Phase 8, 2021-2022) The focus of the political education programs for adults was on five-day week-long seminars, which were recognized as educational leave and funded by the Federal Agency for Political Education (bpb). The events, which mainly took place at the Hattingen conference center, were made more diverse, often included excursions to illustrative "learning locations," and were open to all employees. Our seminars were divided into five thematic areas: 1) Work, Social Issues, and the Union, 2) Democracy, Capitalism, and Ecology, 3) Europe and International Affairs, 4) Technology, Media, and Society, 5) History and Memory. The political education department actively supported the "Future Dialogue" initiative between 2018 and 2021: our educational staff served as moderators at the opening conference and various regional conferences. In addition, the Gewerkschaft Bildungswerk e.V.

In 2019, the union held a summer workshop in Hattingen. In 2020, due to the pandemic, a digital winter workshop was held, followed by a digital summer workshop in 2021 for colleagues from the city and district branches, as well as union secretaries, representatives, and union staff. A key focus was the development of a union education program centered on the theme of "The Union." In August 2020, a new project, "Strengthening Democracy in the Union" (DIAS), was launched with funding from the Federal Agency for Political Education (running from 2020 to 2022). This project targets employees in companies and public administration, as well as works councils and employee representatives. DIAS provides union members with background information and advice on topics such as democracy, anti-discrimination, racism, and right-wing extremism. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic and the associated restrictions on educational activities due to lockdowns and hygiene measures, political adult education had to be significantly restructured in 2020 and 2021. New digital formats, such as webinars, online political seminars and training courses, and conferences, were developed and tested. The union education department, in close coordination and collaboration with the union, organized and implemented nationwide union education activities, primarily at the Hattingen conference center. The wide range of seminars was primarily aimed at full-time and volunteer staff involved in union education. The training and specialization programs covered areas such as training and qualifications for team leaders, political specialization programs for members, international affairs, promoting democracy, vocational education, and student support. In addition, the union-wide trainer program qualified new and well-trained multipliers for union education activities. During the reporting period, the "Democracy Promotion in Vocational Education" competence network project was launched as part of the federal program "Democracy in Action! - Promoting Democracy for and among young people in companies and vocational schools." Supporting materials on democratic education methods are also being published. The education center has been successfully training works council members and representatives of people with disabilities in all functions on legal and other topics relevant to their roles for nearly five decades. With its conveniently located conference center in Hattingen, and the Besenbinderhof education center in the center of Hamburg, participants have a good choice of locations to suit their needs. In addition, nationwide specialist conferences and workshops for works councils are held at other educational and conference facilities. The four-week introductory seminars, combined with the "Saseler Three-Step" approach, remain a hallmark that distinguishes the offerings from those of other educational providers, both in terms of methods and the selection of speakers. In addition to a wide range of basic training courses and various specialist conferences, forums, and expert conferences on legislative changes and new case law, a greater number of digital formats were successfully implemented since 2020 due to the pandemic, and these have been expanded, particularly in preparation for the works council elections in 2022. The union qualification program, newly introduced in 2020, brings together training and development opportunities for full-time and volunteer officials and members of the union. This program organizes the union's continuing education program for full-time employees, offering more than 100 seminars. In addition, union-wide training courses, such as "Qualification for Union Education Activities," are offered. A new project, "Networking, Awareness-Raising, and Support: Union Education Against Right-Wing Influence in the Union," began during the reporting period and is being implemented in cooperation with the MIA department of the union administration until mid-July 2022. The Migration and Equality department aims to promote equal participation for all. This department focuses particularly on people with a migrant background and those with basic education needs. Education, information, and advice are primarily provided through third-party funded projects under the four keywords: migration, integration, diversity, and basic education.

One of the most important areas of focus is protecting workers from exploitation and providing legal advice to people with migration backgrounds and refugees. This work is carried out by "Gewerkschaft" (union) advisors, through projects such as "Support Gewerkschaft," "Gewerkschaft" in North Rhine-Westphalia, and the "Network Fair Posting" project. These projects support the integration of refugees and migrants into the labor market and provide materials on promoting diversity, literacy, and basic education in the workplace (MENTO/MENTOpro projects). For over 30 years, the Gewerkschaft Bildungs-werk e.V. (Gewerkschaft Education Center) has, through the Nord-Süd-Netz (North-South Network), facilitated the exchange between unions and union-affiliated organizations in the Global North and the Global South. Funded by the Social Structural Support programs of the Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation and Development, the Gewerkschaft Bildungs-werk e.V. supported 19 project partner organizations in Latin America, Africa, South and Southeast Asia, and Turkey during the reporting period. A key goal of these projects was to strengthen unions and workers' rights and promote democracy. The education center supports unions in organizing activities for young workers, marginalized and disadvantaged groups, and in developing effective communication and negotiation skills. Another key focus area is promoting fair working conditions throughout value chains, which is supported by a joint declaration between the Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation and Development (BMZ) and the Gewerkschaft. The transformation of the union is also being explored through educational and information programs. The selection of projects was supported by the NSN project advisory board, consisting of representatives from the Gewerkschaft, member unions, and the Friedrich-Ebert-Gewerkschaft. The Gewerkschaft Bildungs-werk e.V. receives international solidarity support from the BMZ, Engagement Global gGmbH, and the German Society for International Cooperation (GIZ). For more information: Gewerkschaft helfen e.V. Founded in response to the 2002 century flood, the purpose of Gewerkschaft helfen e.V. is to provide charitable assistance, particularly through material or non-material emergency aid to people who have been severely affected by unexpected events. This purpose is fulfilled through fundraising, supporting activities, measures, and projects that contribute to alleviating hardship or are suitable for eliminating it. Funding comes from donations. The highest body of the association is the general meeting of members. The responsible management of the association is entrusted to the board, consisting of three members. During the reporting period, Elke Hannack, the deputy chair of the Gewerkschaft, served as chair of the board. The deputy board members were Stefan Körzell and Anja Piel, members of the executive federal board of the Gewerkschaft, who were followed by Annelie Buntenbach in October 2020, who was elected to the board. On behalf of the board, Claudia Meyer served as managing director and Annika Wünsche served as deputy managing director on a voluntary basis since November 2011 and November 2021, respectively. Assistance for Refugees (2016-2020) Those seeking protection from war, violence, and persecution in Germany need solidarity and support. The Gewerkschaft helfen e.V. has contributed by covering the costs of replacing lost certificates or diplomas and for recognition procedures for qualifications obtained in their country of origin. Payments began in early 2017. By 2020, 55 refugees had been supported with a total amount of 26,000 euros. Flood Relief (2021) The flood disaster in July 2021 dramatically changed the lives of many people. The Gewerkschaft and its member unions immediately called for donations for the victims. Within the first fourteen days after the flood, the association managed to organize a professional donation process and, thanks to the support of many regional union managers and local unions, provided emergency assistance to approximately 500 people affected by the flood disaster – in some cases in cash, because there was no infrastructure available. The Gewerkschaft helfen e.V. was one of the organizations that were among the first supporters on the ground, representing the Gewerkschaft and its member unions. The willingness to donate was overwhelming.

[Image: Elke Hannack of the Gewerkschaft in the Ahrtal disaster area after the 2021 flood. Photo: Gewerkschaft / Jan Piegsa]

Never before in the history of the organization have organizations and individuals provided such extensive support, especially during the 2021 flood disaster. From July to December 2021, more than 4,200 individual donations were received. The organization was able to provide immediate and hardship assistance to more than 1,700 affected individuals. Additional funds will be allocated to local non-profit organizations and projects.

**Trade Union Legal Protection**

The German Trade Union Confederation (Gewerkschaft) is responsible for representing the legal interests of its members in labor, social, and administrative law matters. This task has been entrusted to the organization. The organization guarantees competent and high-quality legal advice and representation for union members, works councils, and employee representatives, both before the courts and in the various specialist courts, in all instances up to the European Court of Human Rights, under the basic and contribution agreement. Funding is exclusively from the union's funds within its budget.

In 2021, the management team changed. Reinhard-Ulrich Vorbau successfully led the organization for 16 years until June 30, 2021, developing it into a competitive provider of trade union legal protection. Eva Pulfrich took over as managing director on July 1, 2021. The supervisory board of the organization includes all eight member unions of the Gewerkschaft, represented by their board members, as well as 5 employee representatives. Jutta Blankau is the chair of the supervisory board. Since 2021, Anja Piel, a member of the Gewerkschaft's board, has been a member of the supervisory board and is one of the two deputy chairs of the supervisory board. The organization is divided into five regions: North, East, Bavaria-Hesse, West, and North Rhine-Westphalia. The regional directors are responsible for the management of these regions. The implementation of the trade union legal protection mandate is carried out locally by a total of 39 work units, each led by a team leader.

**Scope of Services**

The legal advice and representation services range from initial consultation to the complete enforcement of the respective legal claim, including enforcement proceedings. The trends of recent years have continued in terms of the types of disputes. In labor law, cases related to wages are at the top, followed by cases primarily related to operational redundancies. Social law inquiries mainly come from the areas of disability law, pension law, and unemployment benefits. The number of cases related to basic income support (SGB II), which had previously been a major area, has decreased. In 2021, a total of 61,798 cases were handled in labor law, 41,803 in social law, and 8,478 in administrative law. Compared to December 31, 2017, the number of cases in labor law has slightly increased (4.3%), while the number in social law has decreased significantly (18%). There has been a considerable increase of 120% in administrative law.

The Center for Revision and European Law has continued to complement and publicly represent the trade union legal protection services. For example, the lawyers at the Center handled the media-covered cases regarding the compensation claim of foreign caregivers in home care, from the first instance to the decision of the Federal Labor Court on June 24, 2021, and also the case regarding the minimum wage for on-call time. Furthermore, the insolvency proceedings regarding the validity of collective bargaining agreements, which differentiate between regular and irregular night work in relation to night work bonuses, have received considerable attention. Overall, the number of cases handled by the trade union center has slightly decreased compared to the previous period.

In the past year, 538 new cases were initiated by the trade union legal protection services before the Federal Supreme Courts and the European Court of Justice.

**Situation of the Organization**

**Personnel:** As of December 31, 2021, the organization employed 738 people in its legal protection offices. 39 employees were on maternity leave or parental leave, or in a longer period of illness. Of the 738 employees, 349 were administrative staff and 389 were legal protection secretaries. In 2021, the average number of employees was 344 administrative staff (270.63 full-time equivalents) and 391 legal protection secretaries (349.99 full-time equivalents).

As of December 31, 2021, a total of 778 employees were employed within the entire organization (legal advice offices, regional offices, and headquarters) under employment contracts with the union. Eight employees, representing a total of 3.75 full-time equivalents, were temporarily assigned to tasks related to promoting employee participation within the union, freeing them from their regular duties. The number of employees remained constant. The proportion of female executives within the union, as of December 31, 2021, is as follows: "Union Internal." Of the five department heads, two are female, representing 40 percent. There are two regional managers out of a total of five positions, also representing 40 percent. The proportion of female team leaders is 15 out of a total of 36 team leader positions, which is 41.66 percent. This means that the proportion of female executives remained relatively constant during the comparative period. Only the position of department head was filled by a female executive. Training: The union organized annual training events for the various professional groups represented, such as legal secretaries and administrative staff. These events focused on different topics (current case law/communication) and aimed to promote service-oriented principles. In 2020 and 2021, these events were held in various formats, in small groups or virtually. The training measures organized by the headquarters in 2021 were well-received. Approximately one in four employees participated in these events. In 2021, the training events were conducted by the Academy of Labour and through in-house training programs. The training courses, which were planned well in advance, could only be partially held as in-person events in 2021. During the year, there was a shift towards online formats. Development: Over the past four years, work processes in the offices have been further optimized, and in the last two years, they have been adapted to the pandemic situation. The Dragon speech recognition program was made available to all legal professionals. The possibility of working remotely, along with the consistent implementation of hygiene measures and the responsible actions of all, made it possible to almost completely avoid infections in the workplace. This ensured that the offices remained operational and that services were reliably available to clients and the union. "Union Internal": Following an evaluation of the client survey conducted in 2019, the quality management system was revised to promote open and proactive communication with client feedback. Since 2019, the company has had an intranet, providing an internal information and knowledge platform. Cross-regional, nationwide procedures are coordinated through this platform. Legal documents and court decisions are made visible and available to all. (Example: Air Berlin, Condor protective shield proceedings, night shift surcharge proceedings). It also serves to connect employees from the 144 offices. Last year, the intranet was supplemented by the "from practice - for practice" case law service. Legal professionals evaluate interesting and useful decisions and make them available to their colleagues. This ensures that even first-instance decisions are not lost but serve as arguments in similar cases. Due to the pandemic, some in-person events had to be postponed or canceled. To maintain communication with the union, partners, works councils, and employees, digital channels were increasingly used for communication. The format of digital knowledge transfer has become established within the company and is well-received. Digitalization is one of the biggest challenges in the further development of the union. It will fundamentally change the way employees work. Communication and the exchange of data between the union, clients, courts, authorities, and the union will largely take place digitally. Paper files will disappear from the offices and will only be available electronically. In 2020, the development and testing of a digital legal file program began, creating the foundation for participating in electronic legal proceedings through the electronic citizen and organizational mailbox 173174.

The introduction of a special electronic citizen and organizational mailbox (eBO) provides the union with a digital and time-sensitive way to communicate with courts and authorities.

**Legal Department / Legal Services / Data Protection**

The work over the past four years has been significantly shaped by digital challenges. With the support of an external service provider, a systematic evaluation of the data protection level within the union was conducted. Since then, the union's compliance with the GDPR has been significantly improved. A data protection coordination position was created, and the acquisition of data protection management software was implemented to centrally manage the necessary documentation and contractual agreements. In addition, procedures for handling data protection incidents, protecting the rights of data subjects, and fulfilling information obligations have been established, and a central information and complaint management system has been set up. Furthermore, the data protection team supports the union's digital transformation and assists in ensuring that numerous new digital applications are legally compliant, such as the use of Microsoft 365 programs, KoMaSys, Open Slides, and Big Blue Button. To support employees in data protection matters, online training sessions have been developed, digital short workshops are offered, and numerous guides and templates are provided. In addition, the legal department provides support and advice to the union, to union colleagues in the departments of the federal executive, and to the union in its political work on various legal issues, and identifies possible courses of action. The main areas of responsibility of the legal department, in addition to data protection law, include contract law, association law, trademark and copyright law, assembly law, and criminal law, as well as occasionally tenancy and tax law. This has enabled various political initiatives of the union to be legally secured. Several statements on draft laws have been coordinated with the legal departments of the member unions, for example:
[Links to documents]

**Personnel Policy**

In the past two years, personnel policy has been largely determined by the COVID-19 pandemic. The necessary measures to protect the health of employees on the one hand and to maintain the operational capacity of the organization on the other hand were implemented in close coordination with the member unions and the regional offices. New coordination formats were introduced, and training programs and leadership development were temporarily conducted entirely digitally. It has become clear that a trusting collaboration at all levels is the basis for successfully managing personnel matters, even in difficult times.

**Development of Employee Structure**

**Distribution of Union Employees**

As of the end of 2021, out of a total of 815 employees (excluding trainees), 238 were part-time, which corresponds to 29.2 percent. The number of part-time positions has therefore increased by 2.4 percent within the four years of the reporting period. Many part-time positions are the result of employees' requests to reduce their working hours and are temporary. The following chart shows the percentage distribution of union employees across the various levels of the union. Most union employees work at the local level within the union. The number of employees on the respective reporting date of the data collection increased by three people in 2021 compared to 2018. Compared to 2020, the number of employees was lower in both the union and the regional offices in 2021, both in total and separately. This is mainly due to currently vacant positions. With regard to the total number of employees in the union, the proportion of employees in the regional offices remained relatively constant at 26.5 percent in 2018 compared to 26.4 percent in 2021. The proportion of employees in the union was accordingly relatively constant at 73.5 percent in 2018 and 73.6 percent in 2021. Within the union, temporary contracts are only made with a valid reason according to the Part-Time Work Act (TzBfG) - for example, for project positions, for positions funded by third parties, for covering illness or parental leave, and for maternity leave. During the reporting period from 2018 to 2021, the number of temporary employment relationships decreased significantly from 74 to 52.

This development is mainly due to the comprehensive collective bargaining agreement "Comprehensive Collective Bargaining Agreement for the Employment of Union Education Officers" concluded in July 2019. This agreement stipulated that youth education officers would be employed on a permanent basis, with an initial term of five years in the respective union department. Age Structure In recent years, there has been a rejuvenation of employees in the political department of the union. This rejuvenation can be explained by both retirements and a relatively high turnover rate in the political department. (Figures as of December 31st.) 700 Employees in the union and the union OD) Union () Union Union 597 611 609 600 2018 2019 2020 2021 Union internal 175 176 61-67 [7 S Q » 56-60 51-55 46-50 41-45 36-40 31-35 25-30 >25 100 80 60 40 20 Pol. Dept./Reg. ® Political Union Age structure of employees in the union and the union - as of December 31, 2021 u R VA Dept./Reg. ® VA Union The largest group among the political secretaries is the 36-40 age group. This means that the age structure in the political department is not centered around a particular age group, but is rather relatively evenly distributed, with peaks in the 36-40 and 56-60 age groups. In the administrative department, the majority of employees are in the 51+ age groups, where the age structure is not uniform, which is also reflected in the comparatively low turnover rate. Gender-Specific Breakdown The percentage of union members among union employees increased by two percentage points during the reporting period. The percentage of female employees is still the highest in the administrative department. Significant positive changes in the union membership rate, in the double-digit percentage range, were observed among both the district chairpersons and their deputies, and among the group of case workers/PCAs in the union administration. In other employee groups, the percentage of female employees also increased significantly during the reporting period, particularly in the political department. Overall, the positive trend shows that the measures taken in recent years to position the union as an attractive and family-friendly employer are having an impact. Union internal Employees with disabilities The union exceeds the legal quota of 5 percent with 6.4 percent. Approximately 55 employees with disabilities were employed annually during the reporting period. Development of the union salary system The union salary system was not subject to any major revisions during the reporting period. Only minor adjustments were made. For example, the designation in the secretariat department has changed from "administrative employee" to "assistant." In addition, it was agreed that employees with at least six years of service who have not yet received the additional grade for the quality of their work should have their eligibility for the additional grade reviewed. A comprehensive change to the salary system was planned for 2020/2021. However, the proposals of the joint works council and the personnel department were too far apart. Another exploratory discussion is planned for 2022. The personnel department generally considers the current salary system to be practical and fair. Salaries of the union The gross monthly salaries of the members of the executive board of the union (the union) remained unchanged since the increase on June 1, 2018: Chairman of the union: 14,500 EUR Deputy chairpersons of the union: 13,150 EUR Other members of the union: 11,825 EUR Pension — Salary conversion The most important pension provider for union employees is the union (the union). In addition to the employer-funded pension plan under VO 95, the majority of salary conversion contracts are also processed through this entity. Union internal Since the reintroduction of a company pension plan as part of the 2009 collective bargaining agreement, 416 employees (approximately 51 percent) currently participate in the employer-supported union salary conversion as of December 31, 2021. As of December 31, 2017, there were 315 employees (39.4 percent) who participated in the employer-supported union salary conversion. The maximum employer contribution to the company pension plan at the union is currently up to 140 euros per month per employee.

It is based on the assumption that employees contribute at least as much as the employer. Occupational health management The COVID-19 pandemic was the focus of occupational health management in the past two years. This included, in particular, the development and continuous adaptation of company pandemic plans to the often short-term changes in legal requirements, the creation of risk assessments, and the procurement of rapid tests and masks for employees. The measures taken were regularly coordinated with the trade union to ensure a consistent approach. Another focus of occupational health management was the prevention of physical and psychological stress in the workplace. During the reporting period, the results of the risk assessment for psychological stress were evaluated. Based on this, measures were developed in the respective organizational units and at the central level. Numerous work processes were evaluated and adjusted, internal processes were improved, and identified stressors were sustainably minimized. The previously offered prevention programs, BETSI and Balance Plus, were further developed and combined based on the RV-Fit prevention measure of the German Pension Insurance. Since the beginning of 2022, the new program GetFit (Trade Union Fitness Training) has been available to all employees of the trade union, as well as the 177-person structure of the trade union. Trade union | thereof | percentage of total | thereof | percentage of total | change in percentage of total | in % Trade union | in % Percentage of salaried employees 0 As of 12/31/2021 Managing director 4 2 50.0 4 2 50.0 0.0 Trade union District chairpersons 9 1 11.1 8 3 37.5 26.4 (1 position vacant in 2021) Deputy district chairpersons & 9 6 66.7 7 6 85.7 19.0 State chairpersons (2 positions vacant in 2021) (provisional) Regional 60 24 40.0 57 25 43.9 3.9 managers (1 position vacant in 2021) Trade union Department heads 17 6 35.3 19 8 42.1 6.8 Political referents 103 47 45.6 103 54 52.4 6.8 Head of department, team leader, PCA 15 9 60.0 21 16 76.2 16.2 Assistant, driver 76 66 86.8 68 59 86.8 -0.1 District administrations / state associations Department heads, 87 41 47.1 9€ı 46 50.5 3.4 Political referents, head of department, team leader, PCA 39 29 74.4 4a 3l 75.6 -1.3 Assistant, driver 75 64 85.3 67 57 85.1 -0.3 Trade union Trade union 131 48 36.6 132 56 42.4 5.8 secretaries Trade union Training 48 25 52.1 53 24 45.3 -6.8 referents Assistant 131 127 96.6 134 127 94.8 -2.2 Trade union Apprentices 15 12 80.0 14 12 85.7 5.7 Other 8 5 62.5 10 4 40.0 222.5 Total 827 512 61.9 829 530 63.9 2.0 Trade union internally The "trade union package" is available to the trade union and the trade union open. Digitalization has also made its way into occupational health management. For example, health measures have been moved from in-person to the virtual world, so that they can be offered to all employees regardless of location. Training In the reporting period, 24 trade union men and women completed their training, and 15 are still in training. Of the 24 women and men who completed their training, 20 were hired and have since been a great support in the administrative area. The trade union is proud of this. Induction phase In December 2016, the Executive Federal Board approved a concept for an induction phase for newly hired political secretaries. After an evaluation in 2018, the induction phase was extended to all new hires. The goal of the induction phase is, among other things, to provide new hires with the necessary knowledge and skills for their work at the trade union, to introduce them to the unique culture of the trade union, and to support them in their orientation and role finding. A checklist and a guide, as well as numerous components (induction event, feedback interviews, welcome package, internships, etc.), are used to ensure a high standard of induction for new hires at all levels of the trade union. The very positive feedback from new hires confirms that the effort is worthwhile. Further training and leadership development The training program aims to enable employees and managers to adapt to changes in the organizational, trade union, and socio-political environment, in order to be well prepared for new topics and challenges. Another aspect is the joint, cross-level learning and the increase in motivation. The program has been continuously expanded, improved in quality, and digitized.

On average, a total of 85 seminars were held each year, with 1000 participants, as part of the central union training and leadership development program. The number of seminars and participants has steadily increased. Representatives of the member union and affiliated organizations also take advantage of the opportunity to participate in selected union seminars. Coaching and team development Coaching and team development training have proven to be very effective in supporting managers. They are now an integral part of leadership development. They significantly improve acceptance on all sides, especially during transitions when colleagues become managers. Personnel dialogues Since mid-2012, the union has implemented personnel dialogues as a key component of its internal communication culture. This personnel management tool is designed to optimize communication and collaboration between immediate supervisors and their employees. Regular meetings – at least once a year – are intended to promote motivation and job satisfaction, as well as understanding of work situations, tasks, and development opportunities. The meetings also provide a space for mutual feedback. The use of this tool varied during the 2018-2021 reporting period. In departments and organizational units where personnel dialogues were used routinely and consistently, feedback from employees and managers was generally very positive. The union is committed to further increasing awareness and understanding of the value of this personnel management tool in order to increase its implementation rate, even in organizational units where it is not yet consistently used. Work-life balance Enabling a balance between different areas of life is an important personnel policy challenge. Currently, there is a family-friendly corporate culture that supports instruments such as temporary reductions in working hours, flexible working arrangements, remote work, sabbaticals, increased parental leave benefits, time off for family members who are ill, coverage of childcare costs for training and work assignments outside of normal working hours, and extended maternity leave. During the pandemic, there were no major challenges for the union in this area. Employees of the union largely found solutions independently. The union expresses its utmost respect for them, knowing the enormous multiple burdens they faced. Cooperation with unions - Personnel Committee In the past two years, the proven and established trusting cooperation of previous years in the personnel committee has been further strengthened. Despite some personnel changes, the reliability in cooperation shows great continuity. It is particularly worth noting the constant willingness to inform each other about current developments and to support coordination processes. European Academy of Labour (EAdA) In 2015, the Academy of Labour gGmbH was founded, which, together with the European Academy of Labour (EAdA), forms the House of Labour at the University of Frankfurt am Main. 2018/19-2021/22 (83rd to 86th course) European Academy of Labour: Students by union X other EVG X X X X X Union internally In order to ensure the future, it is important that the topics of co-determination and labor relations are better represented in research and teaching. In addition, a new employee-oriented degree program in Personnel and Law with a Bachelor's degree has been launched, which enables colleagues without a university entrance qualification to acquire high-quality and recognized qualifications. The number of EAdA students has decreased slightly since the last reporting period. Union internally 131 Union in the union Union Industry Union of Construction, Agriculture and Environment IG Construction, Agriculture and Environment IG Mining, Chemicals and Energy X X X Union of Police = VG X 134 Appendix United Service Union Appendix 135 Membership development in the unions 2018-2021 2018 Total members? Workers and employees! Civil servants?

union total share | male | femaleUnion- total male | female total male | female union in % share in % EVG 187,396 3.1 146,737 40,659 21.7 83,220 64,147 19,073 17,398 14,657 2,741 X 190,931 3.2 142,341 48,590 25.4 22,775 12,020 10,755 168,156 130,321 37,835 X 279,389 4.7 78,934 200,455 71.7 97,024 22,203 74,821 110,545 27,738 82,307 X 247,182 4.1 181,013 66,169 26.8 173,379 116,904 56,475 719 654 65 X 632,389 10.6 495,398 136,991 21.7 632,389 495,398 136,991 0 0 0 X? 2,270,595 | 38.0 1,860,526 410,069 18.1 2,270,595 1,860,526 | 410,069 0 0 0 X? 198,026 3.3 115,121 82,905 41.9 198,025 115,121 82,904 0 0 0 X 1,969,043 | 33.0 939,087 1,029,956 |52.3 1,794,935 | 826,854 968,081 122,111 86,398 35,713 union total 5,974,951 | 100.0 3,959,157 |2,015,794 |33.7 5,272,342 | 3,513,173 | 1,759,169 | 418,929 259,768 159,161 2019 Membership Total? Workers and Employees! Civil Servants? union total share | male | femaleUnion- total male | female total male | female union in % share in % EVG 185,793 3.1 145,322 40,471 21.8 85,872 66,255 19,617 15,901 13,319 2,582 X 194,926 3.3 144,115 50,811 26.1 22,726 12,026 10,761 168,156 130,321 37,835 X 276,264 4.8 77,519 198,745 71.9 96,597 23,384 73,213 108,084 26,166 81,918 X 221,519 3.9 159,453 62,066 28.0 158,068 105,656 52,412 609 541 68 X 591,374 10.3 460,339 131,035 22.2 591,374 460,339 131,035 0 0 0 X? 2,169,183 | 37.9 1,774,091 395,092 18.2 2,169,183 1,774,091 | 395,092 0 0 0 X? 189,098 3.3 112,107 76,991 40.7 189,098 112,107 76,991 0 0 0 X 1,893,920 33.1 898,767 995,153 52.5 1,757,304 807,576 949,728 109,488 76,449 33,039 union total 5,729,371 | 100.0 3,774,675 |1,954,696 |34.1 5,078,717 | 3,368,444 |1,710,273 |409,685 247,978 161,707 2021 Membership Total' Workers and Employees! Civil Servants? union total share | male | femaleUnion- total male | female total male | female union in % share in % EVG 186,301 3.3 145,695 40,606 21.8 94,505 73,264 21,241 12,380 10,145 2,235 X 201,712 3.5 146,704 55,008 27.3 22,588 12,027 10,561 179,124 134,677 44,447 X 276,264 4.8 77,519 198,745 71.9 96,597 23,384 73,213 108,084 26,166 81,918 X 221,519 3.9 159,453 62,066 28.0 158,068 105,656 52,412 609 541 68 X 591,374 10.3 460,339 131,035 22.2 591,374 460,339 131,035 0 0 0 X? 2,169,183 | 37.9 1,774,091 395,092 18.2 2,169,183 1,774,091 | 395,092 0 0 0 X? 189,098 3.3 112,107 76,991 40.7 189,098 112,107 76,991 0 0 0 X 1,893,920 33.1 898,767 995,153 52.5 1,757,304 807,576 949,728 109,488 76,449 33,039 union total 5,729,371 | 100.0 3,774,675 |1,954,696 |34.1 5,078,717 | 3,368,444 |1,710,273 |409,685 247,978 161,707 1 Some unions that no longer differentiate membership numbers by workers and employees are presented here as a combined category. 2 The X, X, and X do not include the category "Civil Servants." 3 The group of "Others" (not listed here) supplements the sum of "Workers/Employees" and "Civil Servants" to the total sum. In the "Others" group, all members are counted who do not fit into "Workers/Employees" or "Civil Servants."

Appendix 137
List of Abbreviations
AEUV X Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union
Al American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations
AUG Artificial Intelligence
Arbeitnehmerüberlassungsgesetz Temporary Agency Work Act
BA Federal Employment Agency
BBG Contribution Assessment Limit
BBiG Vocational Training Act
BDA Confederation of German Employer Associations
BDSG Federal Data Protection Act
BEM Occupational Integration Management
BIP Gross Domestic Product
BMFSFJ Federal Ministry for Family, Seniors, Labor and Social Affairs
BMG Federal Ministry of Health
BMAS Federal Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs
BMBF Federal Ministry of Education and Research
BMI Federal Ministry of the Interior and Home Affairs
183
Vertrag über die Arbeitsweise der Europäischen Union Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union
American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations
Arbeitnehmerüberlassungsgesetz Temporary Agency Work Act
Bundesagentur für Arbeit Federal Employment Agency
Beitragsbemessungsgrenze Contribution Assessment Limit
Berufsbildungsgesetz Vocational Training Act
Bundesvereinigung der deutschen Arbeitgeberverbände Confederation of German Employer Associations
Bundesdatenschutzgesetz Federal Data Protection Act
Betriebliches Eingliederungsmanagement Occupational Integration Management
Bruttoinlandsprodukt Gross Domestic Product
Bundesministerium für Familie, Senio- ren,Gewerkschaft und Gewerkschaft Federal Ministry for Family, Seniors, Labor and Social Affairs
Bundesministerium Gesundheit Federal Ministry of Health
Bundesministerium für Arbeit und Soziales Federal Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs
Bundesministerium für Bildung und Forschung Federal Ministry of Education and Research
Bundesministerium des Inneren und für und Heimat, Wohnen, Stadtteilent- wicklung und Bauwesen Federal Ministry of the Interior and Home Affairs
BMJV Federal Ministry of Justice and Consumer Protection
BSG Federal Social Court
BVerfG Federal Constitutional Court
BVerfGE Decision of the Federal Constitutional Court
Gewerkschaft Trade Union
DSGVO General Data Protection Regulation
EbAV Company Pension Scheme
X
EGMR European Court of Human Rights
ELA European Labour Authority
EMIN European Minimum Income Network
epd Protestant Church Press Service
ESSR European Pillar of Social Rights
ESUG Act to Further Facilitate the Restructuring of Companies
GKV Statutory Health Insurance
GPAI Global Partnership on AI
IBM International Business Machines Corporation
IfSG Infection Protection Act
Appendix
ILAW International Lawyers Assisting Workers
ILO International Labour Organization
INQA Initiative for New Quality of Work
JAV Trade Union and Apprentice Representation
Kl Artificial Intelligence
MDen Medical Services
Gewerkschaft Regular Trade Union
OECD Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
PLS Platform for Learning Systems
SGB Social Code
SURE Support to mitigate Unemployment Risks in an Emergency
vo Regulation
Links to statements to the legislature
During the reporting period, numerous statements were submitted on a wide range of topics within the framework of hearings and legislative procedures. All of these were published on the union's website.
Appendix 139
Imprint
Publisher:
Trade Union
Department for Fundamental Issues and Social Policy
Henriette-Herz-Platz 2
10178 Berlin
Responsible: Reiner Hoffmann
Editorial Staff: Dr. Kai Lindemann, Andrea Schiele
Contact: Email:
Acknowledgements:
We thank the specialist departments of the trade union for their contributions.
Design: Wigwam eG
Printing:
DCM Druck Center Meckenheim GmbH
Werner-von-Siemens-Str. 13
53340 Meckenheim
Date: 9.2.2022