[fo] We are making Sweden work. Motions and Statements. Point 12. Union. Economic matters. Decision-making document for the union congress. 2024. Union. Union. Union. Photo: Lars Forsstedt. Graphic design: Union. Production and printing: Bantorget Grafiska AB, Stockholm 2024. ISBN 978-91-566-3673-8. Union. April 24, 2024. 100 Contents. 12. Our economy. 12.a. Report from the Finance Committee. Motions 12.1 - 12.4. 12.b. Compensation regulations. Motion 12.5. 12.c. Members' perspectives. Motions 12.6 - 12.11. MOTIONS AND STATEMENTS. 3. Point 12. Our economy. 12. Our economy. 12.a. Report from the Finance Committee. Report from the Finance Committee to the union congress 2024. The Finance Committee's mandate. In preparation for the 2024 congress, the union's Finance Committee was tasked with evaluating the issue of union membership fees during the upcoming congress period, and also with outlining developments during the previous period. During the current congress period, the Finance Committee has also been tasked with annually assessing the development of the average union fee and annually presenting a proposal for the size of the union fee to the union's representative body. The committee has consisted of representatives from all unions and has, at several meetings during 2023-2024, addressed the conditions for the upcoming congress period. Economic situation. The union's economy has been affected during the past congress period by both the coronavirus pandemic and changes in the financial markets. The union's results have been impacted by the 2020/21 congress and the 2022 election. The number of union members has decreased (a decrease of 3 percent in 2022 compared to 2020) after a temporary increase in 2020 due to the coronavirus pandemic, while union membership revenue has still increased by 2 percent during the same period. However, the membership fee to the union has been limited by the ceiling that the 2016 congress decided upon and which has been in effect since then. The union's economy has also been significantly affected by the increased distribution of profits from the business activities of subsidiaries, from 60 million SEK per year in 2017 to 85 million SEK in 2020, 125 million SEK in 2021, and 170 million SEK from 2022. This increase to 170 million SEK is temporary and is related to the major project "Strengthened organization - strengthened union," which the union's board decided to implement. At the end of 2020, the union's major assignment regarding "The Union insures" also ended, which was transferred to a joint performer. The financial market has been volatile during the congress period due to the coronavirus pandemic, disruptions in global supply chains, the outbreak of war in Ukraine, and sharply rising interest rates. The return on the investment portfolio has been 20.8 percent during the period November 2020 to November 2023. The long-term focus of asset management is, and has been, to generate returns in a well-balanced portfolio to finance the union's activities. One aspect of this has been, during the congress period, to reduce the proportion of real estate investments. During the period, holdings in the "X" business and "X" properties in Örenäs have been sold, as well as the stake in SHH Landbolaget, including land in Tumba. Strategic decisions have also been made not to expand investments in Bantorget Hyresbostäder through the completed new issue. At the end of the congress period, further parts of the land in Åkers Runö are expected to be sold, unless a decision by the Environmental Appeal Board makes this impossible. During the congress period, the renovation work at Folkets hus has also begun, with Norra Latin returning to being a school and the major renovation of Folkets hus starting. This has been done entirely with external funding, but it also means that the distribution of profits from the business has been put on hold for a period. The long-term distribution capacity of the subsidiaries has been investigated with the help of consultants. A sustainable and balanced distribution of 125 million SEK is possible, but also depends on economic development and maintenance and development investments in the underlying real estate holdings. Work on a real estate strategy has been initiated. Table 1. Operating results (million SEK). Year. 2006. 2007. 2008. 2009. 2010. 2011. 2012. 2013. 2014. 2015. 2016. 2017. 2018. 2019. 2020. 2021. 2022. 2023*. Membership fees. 255. 244. 229. 225. 231. 230. 241. 250. 255. 263. 264. 257. 257. 257. 258. 258. 254. 254. Operating expenses. 349. 305. 333. 264. 295. 310. 349. 327. 329. 319. 340. 332. 370. 338. 352. 341. 457. 486. Result. -97. -61. -104. -39. -64. -57. -82. -53. -46. -26. -56. -41. -96. -64. -83. -72. -175. -241. * The figures for 2023 are budgeted amounts.

Table I describes the net costs dependent on the board of directors and cannot be compared with the results of the trade union in the annual reports, because the starting point was that income from membership fees should correspond to operating costs. Membership fees have not, since 1999, covered the costs of the trade union activities, which means that the result from asset management has annually financed the deficit. Results for the current congress period (2021-2024): 2021: Actual result: 58,017,000 SEK 2022: Actual result: -10,340,000 SEK 2023: Budget: -46,894,000 SEK 2024: Preliminary budget: -72,254,000 SEK Total for the congress period: -62,165,000 SEK The large surplus in 2021 was due to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. In 2022-2023, there were high costs related to pension obligations, while a refund from Folksam for over-consolidation of 20 million SEK was received in 2022. In 2024, both the congress and the elections for the European Parliament will be held. Trade union own capital: In 2008, the congress decided that the trade union's restricted equity should correspond to the amount in the accounts at the end of 1999 and should be secured by ensuring that, on average over the congress period, there are assets with a market value that is at least equal to the increase in restricted equity, adjusted for the consumer price index from the base year 2000. The original purpose of the security was to allow the trade union to use the investment income according to a special decision-making process without jeopardizing the trade union's capital base. PROPOSALS AND STATEMENTS 5, POINT 12. Our Economy: The restricted equity should be considered a fund to be used in the event of a conflict, in accordance with the trade union's statutes, and can also be used by the trade union for specific purposes of great importance to the trade union members. The trade union's financial position should be so good that there are large safety margins. This means that the trade union should be able to handle unforeseen events, such as political decisions, large reductions in the trade union's membership, and major declines in the capital markets. In addition, it is important to have financial resources for strategically important initiatives, such as public relations and possible changes in operations. In addition to the aforementioned financial obligations, the trade union may also pay conflict compensation. In accordance with the trade union's statutes, §18, paragraph 1-2, affiliated unions have the right to request conflict compensation from the trade union's board in cases where the union has requested and received permission for a conflict. The same right to request conflict compensation applies in the event of a lockout, where the lockout was caused by a strike action approved by the trade union's board. According to §19, paragraph 1-2, the trade union may also pay conflict grants of up to 20% of the paid conflict compensation in the event of a strike or lockout in connection with joint negotiations between unions. The probability that the trade union will pay out conflict compensation on a large scale remains low. An analysis of the trade union's member unions shows that almost all 14 unions have a very good financial position and can therefore handle any conflicts on their own. However, there are unions that may find themselves in a situation where they need to apply for support from the trade union in the event of a very extensive or prolonged conflict. This mainly applies to some of the smaller trade unions in terms of membership, which also automatically limits the size of the payments. Below, Table 2 shows the average market value of the trade union's assets in combination with the group's book equity in thousands of kronor. The market value is calculated as the group's equity adjusted for overvalues in parent and subsidiary companies, taking into account minority interests and latent taxes. Table 2: Average market value of the trade union's assets in combination with the group's book equity in thousands of kronor. Year: 2022, 2021, 2020, 2019, 2018, 2017, 2016, 2015. Equity (in thousands of kronor): 3,182,396, 3,187,696, 3,057,129, 3,122,801, 2,971,015, 2,725,092, 2,625,194, 2,518,917. Overvalue of property: 5,001,543, 4,853,039, 4,560,880, 4,562,894, 3,536,926, 2,682,446, 2,291,381, 1,575. Minority interest deduction: -1,781,047, -1,756,368, -1,678,431, -1,672,382, -1,373,321, -1,017,769, -854,319, -544,916. Overvalue of short-term investments: 190,658, 402,366, 294, 241, 225,835, 112,507, 51,273, 382,477, 310,111. Total overvalue before tax: 3,411,154, 3,499,037, 3,176,690, 3,116,347, 2,276,112, 2,177,412, 1,819,539, 1,340,322. Tax: -702,698, -720,802, -654,398, -666,898, -500,745, -479,031, -400,299, -294,871. Adjusted Equity excluding tax: 5,890,852, 5,965,931, 5,579,421, 5,572,250, 4,746,382, 4,423,473, 4,044,434, 3,564,368. The secured equity for 2022 amounted to 1,717 million kronor, compared to the average assets of 5,890 million kronor. This means that the congress's requirement for equity is met. PROPOSALS AND STATEMENTS 6, POINT 12.

OUR ECONOMY
Table 3: Membership Revenue (in millions of SEK)
Year | 2005 | 2006 | 2007 | 2008 | 2009 | 2010 | 2011 | 2012 | 2013 | 2014 | 2015 | 2016 | 2017 | 2018 | 2019 | 2020 | 2021 | 2022 | 2023
Actual | 259 | 255 | 244 | 229 | 225 | 231 | 230 | 241 | 250 | 255 | 263 | 264 | 257 | 257 | 257 | 258 | 258 | 254 | 254

Membership revenue, expressed in nominal terms, decreased from 2001 to 2009, primarily due to a decrease in the number of union members. This is shown in Table 3, which details the development of the union fee. In 2008, the union congress decided that the union fee should be aligned with the membership fees, which resulted in an improved financial situation for the union, despite the declining membership. Prior to 1990, the fee per member was determined annually. In 1991, it was fixed at 13.80 SEK per member per month. This rate remained in effect until 2009. Figure 1 below shows the fee per member per month, both in nominal and real terms, with 1980 as the base year. It should be noted that, despite increases in the fee in the early 1980s, the real value decreased due to inflation. In recent years, the fee has been capped, and with the current increase in inflation, the real value of the fee is again decreasing. The real value was calculated based on the consumer price index (CPI). Figure 2 on the next page shows the same development for the years 2008-2023.

Figure 1: Union fee per member (in SEK) 1980-2023
= Nominal fee
= Real fee
[Chart showing nominal and real fees over time]

The 2008 congress decided to increase the fee for 2009 to 14.00 SEK per member per month and that the fee to the union should thereafter follow the development of the union fees. This meant that the value of the fee would not be eroded by inflation, which was relatively low for several years. The 2016 congress decided to introduce a cap on the maximum fee that could be charged during the congress period. This cap has been applied to the fees for 2019-2024.

Figure 3: Union fee according to the established model compared to the applied cap
= Fee according to the model
= Fixed cap
[Chart comparing the fee according to the model and the fixed cap]

The capped membership fee has resulted in the fee not being aligned with the union's changing resources, but rather has developed significantly worse. If the cap had not existed, the fee in 2023 would have been 20.05 SEK instead of 17.84 SEK. The principle of alignment has therefore been abandoned. For example, in 2023, this represents a loss of approximately 30 million SEK, or 12%, in membership fees, in addition to the revenue change that the union itself has experienced. During the entire current congress period (2021-2024), the membership fee would have been a total of 100 million SEK higher if the cap had not been in place. This has meant that the union has operated with a slightly lower level of ambition and with larger deficits over the congress period. A comparison between the actual revenue, based on the cap, and the revenue that would have been generated if the fee had been aligned with the union's resources is shown in Figure 4.

Figure 4: Membership revenue per year with and without the cap
= Actual revenue
= Revenue without the cap
[Chart comparing actual revenue with revenue without the cap]

Membership Development
Figure 5: Active members 1990-2022
[Chart showing the number of active members over time]

The number of members continued to decrease until 2022, which is largely due to structural changes in the labor market and the fact that younger generations have a lower membership rate than older generations. In 2007, the number of active members decreased by 120,000. This is the largest decrease during the period after 1990. The changes in unemployment insurance contributions introduced in 2007 also affected the membership development in 2008. From 2009, the number of members decreased at a slower rate, and in 2014 and 2015, the number was essentially unchanged. From 2016, the number has again decreased somewhat. An exception to the declining trend was in 2020, when several unions experienced a positive effect on membership due to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic.

Fee System
The current statutory fee system consists of three fee classes, and the union has been assigned to the different classes depending on the relative wage level between union members and non-members, with compensation for part-time work. The fee in class 1 is 5% higher than the fee in class 2, and the fee in class 3 is 5% lower than the fee in class 2.

The union's finance committee has discussed the issue of dividing members into different fee classes and has found no reason to change the classification for the upcoming congress period, as neither the organizational structure nor the relative wage levels have changed.

**RESOLUTIONS AND STATEMENTS**
**10. OUR ECONOMY**
**Table 4: Division of the union into fee classes**
Class 1 (+5 percent)
Class 2
Class 3 (-5 percent)
X GS (Union for the Forestry, Wood, and Graphic Industries)
The Union of Property Services Employees
The Union of Electricians
The Union of Metal and Engineering Workers
The Union of Retail Employees
The Union of Paper Industry Workers
The Industrial Workers' Union
The Metalworkers' Union
The Restaurant Workers' Union
The Painters' Union
The Union of Service and Communications Workers
The Municipal Workers' Union
The Transport Workers' Union
The Musicians' Union
**Congress Period Budget**
In recent years, the union has worked on a multi-year forecast to highlight cost development during the upcoming congress period and to assess how the union's activities should be financed. The business activities under Bantorget Management have become increasingly important in financing the union's activities during the past congress period. Investigations were conducted in 2018 regarding the potential dividend levels from the subsidiaries, which resulted in the performance requirements expressed in the 2019 shareholder guidelines for the companies. These guidelines stipulated that the regular dividend should be 60 million SEK in 2020 and 125 million SEK per year for the years 2021-2024. In addition, the union has decided on additional dividends to finance the "Strengthened Organization" project. Following changes in both the organization and the holdings and conditions, a renewed investigation of the subsidiaries' dividend capacity was conducted in 2023. The recommendations from the union's finance committee have been taken into account in this document. The union's membership fee for the upcoming congress period has been calculated in several different scenarios with various assumptions, including extending the current fee model with compliance but with a cap, reverting to a model without a cap, a phased return to the model, or abolishing the model altogether and instead setting the fee annually without a guiding model. The work of the finance committee has led to a proposal where everyone sees the value of having a fixed model for calculating the fee, which also ensures compliance with the union's resources. The proposal is to use the current cap of 17.84 as the basis for indexing according to the model starting with the 2026 fee. No "adjustment" is made to the difference between what the fee would have been today without the cap and the actual cap, in order to avoid a sharp increase in membership fees all at once. Instead, the fee during the congress period is proposed to have a floor of 17.84 in fee class II. As noted above, the current congress period has resulted in significant deficits, and since no significant increase in membership fees is expected during the upcoming congress period, it is important for the board to manage cost development in order to achieve a balanced result during the congress period. At the same time, it was noted that there are opportunities for cost savings through increased cooperation between unions and between unions and the union. These opportunities must be exploited to a greater extent during the upcoming congress period.

**RESOLUTIONS AND STATEMENTS**
**11. OUR ECONOMY**
**Summary and Proposal**
The deficit in the union's activities remains. Previous fee committees had as a starting point that the operating costs should be covered by membership fees, but they noted that this has not been possible to combine with the ambitions of the union's activities. The finance committee has noted for the past fifteen years that the union must also finance part of the activities with investment income, which continues to be an important part of financing the union's activities. To ensure the long-term sustainability of the union, the fee committee recommends a return to the fee model that has been in place since 2009, with a balance between the union's resources and the membership fee, but that the cap, which has been applied since the decision at the 2016 congress, be removed. The union's finance committee has annually reported proposals to the union's representatives regarding the union's fee. This has proven to be a robust system that has partially solved the problem of the negative real development. The finance committee believes that the current system with compliance is reasonable and positive and that it should continue during the congress period. However, it is proposed that an increase in the membership fee be implemented only in 2026, starting from the current fee of 17.84, and not from what the fee would have been without the cap that has been applied in recent years.

To address the consequences of this, it is proposed that a minimum fee of 17.84 in fee class II be applied during the congress period. The union's finance committee proposes that the congress establish that the principle of aligning resource development between affiliated organizations and the union should continue to be applied, that a minimum fee of 17.84 in fee class II should be maintained during the congress period, that any increase should be based on the current level and implemented in the 2026 membership fees, that the union's finance committee be tasked with annually assessing the development of the average affiliated organization fee and annually reporting a proposal for the size of the union fee to the union's representative body during the congress period, that the union's representative body be authorized to annually review the issue of the size of the union fee, that the LÖS board be tasked with managing cost development in order to prevent deficits in the union's budget during the entire congress period, and that the LÖS board be tasked with striving for increased cooperation between affiliated organizations and between affiliated organizations and the union in terms of activities/functions in order to reduce the total cost burden for the union and affiliated organizations.

RESOLUTIONS AND STATEMENTS
POINT 12. OUR ECONOMY
12.1 Regarding the financing of regional and local cross-union activities, the following unions in the Stockholm region have proposed this: Handelsanställdas förbund (Union of Salaried Employees) department 20 Stockholm, X- and restaurant union department 02 Stockholm-Gotland, Pappersindustriarbetareförbundet (Paper Industry Workers' Union) department 68 Hallstavik, Elektrikerförbundet (Electricians' Union) department I.

A union is an organization that carries out the tasks assigned to it by its members. The specific tasks are defined in the statutes and decisions of the union's democratic structures: congresses, representative bodies, boards, councils, committees, and working groups. To ensure effective operation, these tasks must be supported by adequate resources. Without them, democratic decisions cannot be implemented as intended, and the decisions become meaningless. An organization that makes meaningless decisions tends to lose its legitimacy and becomes meaningless itself. This proposal is based on the situation as it exists in the Stockholm region. However, there is no reason to believe that the tasks assigned to unions in other parts of the country are fully funded. The tasks assigned to unions, as defined in the statutes, are as follows:

*   To bring together all affiliated organizations in cross-union activities at the regional and local levels.
*   To coordinate and support member organizations in their work to maintain a high level of organization and high collective bargaining coverage.
*   To monitor and advocate for issues of union interest and to participate in public debate through public relations efforts.
*   To conduct active youth and school information programs and to ensure that there are local school organizers for all municipalities.
*   To coordinate union education.
*   To actively engage in union-political cooperation with the Social Democrats.

The union's various levels, from the congress to the office, specify these tasks within the framework of the above. This has resulted in a large number of demanding tasks, which are also increasing. The tasks outlined in the statutes, along with those added on top of them, cannot be carried out in a way that actually changes the reality for the member organizations of the union district or the members of the local branches with the current allocation of resources. Other organizations, especially businesses, understand this and staff their organizations in a much more serious way. Even Ung företagsamhet (Young Entrepreneurs), with its relatively narrow mandate, has 149 employees in its regional organization, 14 of whom are in the Stockholm region. In addition, there are 17 employees at the headquarters. The Stockholm Chamber of Commerce, which is, in a sense, the counterpart to the union district in regional development issues, has 12 employees in its business policy unit alone. The union district in the Stockholm region currently has eight permanent employees in the office, but is facing a million-kronor deficit next year due to the new membership fee. This small number of employees is responsible for representing the union in the Stockholm region: a region that accounts for one-fifth of the country's population, one-quarter of the country's workforce, and has the most significant problems in the country with precarious employment, migrant workers, low unionization rates, privatization, and labor union-related crime. The union district in the Stockholm region last changed its fee in 2005. Taking into account inflation and the common membership fee, the real value of the fee per member has decreased by 43.5 percent between 2005 and 2023. In addition, the funding from the union has not been increased to keep pace with inflation for many years, and of course, there has been a decline in membership. The number of permanent positions in the office has decreased accordingly, despite extensive cuts in other areas.

We believe in cross-functional operations at the regional and local levels. We want it to have the resources to fulfill its current responsibilities, and ideally, more responsibilities that are valuable to the member organizations. Others may certainly have different opinions and want to continue at the current level, or even reduce operations. These are all legitimate positions that should be discussed between the union and within the union, but none of them address the biggest problem: the consistent underfunding of the operations. Every serious organization must take responsibility for ensuring that the decisions it makes are feasible. Every time we make decisions about impossible tasks for the union, the legitimacy of our organization decreases. Our decisions often take the form of hopeful aspirations rather than concrete action. The union receives assignments at the central and regional levels that everyone knows are impossible, and is forced year after year to report failures. One might think that in such a situation, we would lower expectations for the regional union organization, but instead, new assignments are regularly added to the already strained staff of the union. This is not a responsible way to manage the members' money or a serious way to run our organization. We propose that the congress decide 1) to task the board with reviewing the extent to which the union's assignments are funded in a way that allows the union to carry them out in a manner that meets the high expectations for the regional and local operations, and 2) to task the board, if the review finds a gap between assignments and funding, to take action to close the gap.

12.2 Funding - Cash for the Union
The Municipal Workers' Union, Stockholm County Branch
Our union should carry out the tasks that the members assign to it. These tasks are defined in the statutes and decisions of the union's democratic structure: congresses, representative bodies, the board, committees, and working groups. In order for the organization to function, tasks must be accompanied by the necessary resources. Without them, democratic decisions become impossible to implement as intended, and the decisions seem meaningless. An organization that makes meaningless decisions tends to lose its legitimacy and becomes meaningless itself. This motion is based on the situation as it exists in the Stockholm region, but there is no reason to believe that the assignments given to the union in other parts of the country are fully funded. The assignments given to the union, as defined in the statutes, are as follows:
- To bring together all member organizations in cross-functional operations at the regional and local levels.
- To coordinate and support member organizations in their work to maintain a high level of organization and high collective bargaining coverage.
- To monitor and advocate for issues of union interest, and to participate in the public debate through public relations.
MOTIONS AND STATEMENTS
POINT 12. OUR ECONOMY
- To conduct an active youth and school information program and to be responsible for having local school organizers in all municipalities.
- To coordinate union education.
- To actively engage in union-political cooperation with the Social Democrats.
The union's various levels, from the congress to the regional offices, specify the tasks within the framework of the above. This has resulted in a large number of demanding tasks, which are also becoming more and more numerous. With the current allocation of resources and the tasks defined in the statutes, and those added on top of them, it is not possible to carry them out in a way that actually changes the reality for the member organizations or the members of the local branches. Other organizations, especially those in the business sector, understand this and staff their organizations accordingly. Even Young Enterprise, with its relatively narrow mandate, has 149 employees in its regional organization, 14 of whom are in the Stockholm region. In addition, there are 17 employees at the headquarters. The Stockholm Chamber of Commerce, which is in some ways the counterpart to the union in regional development issues, has 12 employees in its business policy unit alone. The union's regional office in Stockholm County has only eight permanent employees, but is facing a million-kronor deficit next year due to the new membership fee. This small number of employees is supposed to represent the union in the Stockholm region. This is a region that accounts for one-fifth of the country's population, one-quarter of the country's employees, and has the biggest problems in the country with precarious employment, migrant workers, low unionization rates, privatization, and labor union crime. The union's regional office in Stockholm County last changed its fee in 2005. Taking into account inflation and the common membership fee, the real value of the fee per member in the local branches has decreased by 43.5 percent from 2005 to 2023.

In addition to this, the funding allocated to the union has not been increased to keep pace with inflation for many years, and of course, there has been a decline in membership. The number of permanent positions at the headquarters has decreased accordingly, despite significant cuts in other areas. The Stockholm County Municipality believes in cross-sectoral activities at the regional and local levels. We want to ensure that it has the resources to fulfill its current responsibilities, and ideally, even more responsibilities that are valuable to us all. Others may have different opinions and want to maintain the current level, or even reduce the activities. These are all legitimate positions that are worth discussing between the union and within the union, but none of them address the biggest problem: the consistent underfunding of the activities. Every serious organization must take responsibility for ensuring that the decisions it makes are feasible. Every time we make decisions about goals that we cannot achieve, the legitimacy of our organization is undermined. Our decisions often take the form of optimistic hopes rather than effective management. The union is assigned tasks at the central and regional levels that seem impossible to achieve, and is forced year after year to report failures. The logical approach in such a situation would be to lower the goals for the regional union organization, but instead, new tasks are regularly added to the already strained staff at the union. This is not a responsible way to manage members' money or a serious way to run our organization.

**RESOLUTIONS AND STATEMENTS**
**POINT 12. OUR FINANCES**
We propose that the congress decides:
1. To task the board with reviewing the extent to which the union's activities are funded in a way that allows the union to carry them out in a manner that meets the high expectations for regional and local activities.
2. To review the funding allocated to the union's activities (to be reviewed annually or every other year).
3. To task the board with taking action to close any gap between the assigned tasks and the funding, if the review reveals such a gap.
1. To task the board with reviewing the extent to which the union's activities are funded in a way that allows the union to carry them out in a manner that meets the high expectations for regional and local activities.
2. To task the board with taking action to close any gap between the assigned tasks and the funding, if the review reveals such a gap.
12.2
1. To task the board with reviewing the extent to which the union's activities are funded in a way that allows the union to carry them out in a manner that meets the high expectations for regional and local activities.
2. To review the funding allocated to the union's activities (to be reviewed annually or every other year).
3. To task the board with taking action to close any gap between the assigned tasks and the funding, if the review reveals such a gap.
13.25
1. The central union should provide more resources to the union branches (to be discussed under agenda item 12.a).
2. To review the funding allocated to the union's activities (to be reviewed annually or every other year) (to be discussed under agenda item 12.3).

Resolutions 12.1, 12.2, and 13.25 (points 1 and 4) address whether the union is funded in a way that allows it to meet the high expectations of its activities, and to task the union with reviewing the funding and, if necessary, closing any gaps. The proposers also want to establish annual funding levels and for the central union to provide more resources to the union branches in the municipalities.

The union's activities are funded in three main areas: the union ensures a financial foundation and provides staff in all union districts. Activity-based contributions are linked to established targets and other centrally decided activities. The main source of funding is membership fees intended for the union's activities. Previously, each union district determined the level of membership fees through its representatives. This system has now been replaced by a uniform central membership fee for the union, which is set by the union at the national level and then distributed to the union in a central allocation process. The purpose of the change in the fee system, which originated from both previous congress resolutions and subsequent decisions by the union, is to provide equal opportunities to conduct activities. The union's declining membership over time affects the union's membership revenue, while costs in other areas are increasing. This poses significant challenges over time for both union districts and the union as a whole.

The union's organizational structure and funding provide a strong foundation that enables both local union branches in municipalities and the union as a whole to be effective players in the labor market across the regions. The union believes that the current conditions allow it to fulfill its responsibilities and provide equal opportunities for its operations throughout Sweden. The union continuously monitors its activities in close collaboration with its members and tracks both established goals and ongoing operations. Based on this, it is proposed to reject the motions. The board proposes that the congress decides to reject motions 12.1, 12.2, 13.25 (clause 1), and 13.25 (clause 4).

12.3 Ensuring the funding of adult education and the Workers' Educational Association (ABF).

As is well known, the right-wing in Sweden has long been critical of the strength that the labor movement has gained through our grassroots work. This includes our adult education programs and the Workers' Educational Association (ABF), which is now under severe pressure from the right-wing government led by Kristersson, with the support of the Sweden Democrats. While the right-wing has long criticized our educational initiatives, it is worth noting that the far-right and racist party, the Sweden Democrats, have not hesitated to take action. The Sweden Democrats are a party that has long sought and known how to target the labor movement to undermine it. They have focused on the lottery operations of the Social Democratic Party, which has been embarrassing for the Moderate Party, which has engaged in similar activities, albeit with less success. Regarding the union movement, they attack the procedures for appointing workplace safety representatives. Against the broader labor movement, the Sweden Democrats have pressured the right-wing government to reduce state funding for educational activities, and by 2026, half a billion krona will be cut. This will inevitably have a significant impact on the ABF. At the same time, it may be time for a movement that strives for a new, better, and more just society to realize that it is risky to entrust the state with the foundation of its operations. We ask ourselves if it is not time for the union movement to secure its operations and make them less vulnerable to changes in government by taking greater responsibility for funding, possibly in collaboration with other grassroots organizations such as the Swedish Social Democratic Labour Party and the Swedish Social Democratic Youth League. Regardless of how this is resolved, an initiative from the union would be valuable, and it is in the interest of the working class that we have our own educational organization that remains strong even in difficult times. The liberation of the working class must be its own work, and it begins with educational efforts.

MOTIONS AND STATEMENTS

17. POINT 12. OUR ECONOMY

We propose that the congress decides:

1.  That the union takes the initiative to develop a new funding model for the Workers' Educational Association (ABF).
2.  That the union takes greater financial responsibility and makes a greater financial contribution than today for the funding of the Workers' Educational Association.
3.  That at least one percent of the total return on the union's assets is allocated to educational activities each year (to be considered under agenda item 12.3).
4.  That at least three percent of the total return on the union's assets is allocated to educational activities each year (to be considered under agenda item 12.3).

Education within the union movement is a cornerstone of our survival, success, and development. It has always been and will always remain so. Because it is so central to our success and strength, it is always more or less vulnerable and threatened by those who want the union to have less power. The current weak bourgeois government is entirely dependent on the Sweden Democrats, who have a clear agenda to significantly weaken the labor movement for a long time to come. This is well described in motion 12.2. It is no secret that the union is extremely critical of all these attacks. Significant cuts in state funding for educational activities will also have a major impact on the Workers' Educational Association (ABF). The ABF's activities are largely funded by contributions from the state, regions, and municipalities, as well as by fees from participants and member organizations. The union is currently one of approximately 50 organizations that are national members of the ABF. The motion proposes that the union take the initiative to develop a new funding model, but it is the ABF itself that must take a comprehensive approach to measures to survive the current financial situation and unite its members.

The ABF has addressed this through its future commission, "A Sustainable ABF for the Future: Making a Different World Possible." In this work, unions have expressed their views on issues such as a new funding model. It is important for unions to continue to develop their collaboration with the ABF. Unions must also continue to invest resources in their own education and through union training, which we are doing. Motions 13.41 and 13.42 propose that at least one percent, and three percent respectively, of the total return on union assets each year be allocated to educational activities. Currently, unions allocate nearly three percent of the total return on union assets to union knowledge systems and ten percent to all educational activities. It is crucial that we collaborate and use resources effectively to provide the right and good training programs, and that we recruit and fill all of our training programs. The board proposes that the congress decide to reject motions 12.3, 13.41 (first paragraph), and 13.42 (first paragraph).

12.4 School Information
Industri Metall, Department 2, Norrbotten
We believe that improved school information is needed for our young people. They lack a proper understanding of the values and principles of the union, so more resources are needed to improve school information. We propose that the congress decide to:
1. Instruct the union to allocate sufficient resources to improve school information.
2. Instruct the union to improve the training of information officers (to be discussed under agenda item 13.e).

12.4.1 Instruct the union to allocate sufficient resources to improve school information. School information is a crucial factor in increasing young people's knowledge of the Swedish trade union movement. School information provides students with an understanding of the importance of organizing and creates a good foundation for membership when they enter the labor market. We have long known that well-trained and engaged union information officers are the most important factor in providing good school information. The union has been working to improve school information. Since 2024, the union has been testing its new approach in a number of pilot districts, and the results are being evaluated continuously until the end of 2024. The final report of the pilot program will show whether the changes have led to the effects that the motioner is seeking, namely more resources for school information and improved training for information officers. The board proposes that the congress decide to reject motion 12.4 (first paragraph).

12.b Compensation Rules
12.5 Solidarity for those within the union who do not have full-time employment as the norm
Industri Metall, Department 26, Östergötland
There needs to be a change in the union's compensation system for those who do not have the benefit of working in industries where full-time employment is the norm. Currently, the compensation system is designed for those who work full-time from Monday to Friday. There are no problems for them. However, for those working in the sectors covered by Handels, Kommunal, or HRF agreements, where full-time employment is not the norm, there are problems. For example, a retail employee working 30 hours a week (75 percent) may have to supplement their income by taking on extra hours through an app provided by their employer, which shows when there are extra hours available to fill their working hours. This person is also involved in Handels and their union district, providing school information to the next generation about the importance of being a member of a trade union. This reality makes it more difficult for those who want to get involved in union activities. It is difficult to dare to get involved as much as they want without being affected by less scheduled time. Or they may work significantly more than 40 hours due to union duties, which must then be performed on their own time on days off, and then they must fill their working hours with their employer. In practice, this can mean that union representatives may be working seven days a week, while many wonder why it is difficult to find union representatives in industries where full-time employment is not the norm. Some unions solve this problem themselves, but some refuse. The union believes that union work is not a job but a calling, or that there is no money to ensure that more people go out and meet new members. We ourselves say that one should never work for free, but within the movement, some are expected to work on their own time, which affects them financially, while those of us who have full-time jobs do not have these problems. Class divisions within our own ranks are not acceptable, so let us instead show solidarity with our colleagues within the union family who have not yet been able to achieve full-time employment.

We propose that the congress decides: 1) that the union adapts its compensation system so that those working in industries where full-time employment is not the norm are entitled to compensation on weekdays when they are not scheduled to work, allowing them to reach a total of 40 working hours, which is the standard full-time, when they are engaged in outreach activities such as school information sessions; and 2) that the union incorporates a safeguard mechanism into this adaptation to prevent abuse.

MOTIONS AND STATEMENTS
20. POINT 12. OUR ECONOMY
12.5
1) that the union adapts its compensation system so that those working in industries where full-time employment is not the norm are entitled to compensation on weekdays when they are not scheduled to work, allowing them to reach a total of 40 working hours, which is the standard full-time, when they are engaged in outreach activities such as school information sessions; and 2) that the union incorporates a safeguard mechanism into this adaptation to prevent abuse.

One of the true strengths of the union movement is the elected representatives who, with their time and commitment, drive the organization forward. The role of an elected representative typically originates in the workplace and may sometimes extend to the departmental level or equivalent within the union. In the union's regional activities, this often takes the form of membership in local union branches or as employees providing union services, such as school information officers.

The issue raised in motion 12.5 concerns compensation for elected representatives who do not have income on the day of their assignment or are forced to decline work due to insecure employment. An important aspect for the union is the view that a union role is a commitment within an organization based on voluntary principles, where members collectively invest their time to strengthen the union movement. The underlying principle of compensation is that no one should lose compensation for performing union work, and this is handled within the union as actual lost earnings that form the basis for compensation for union employees.

However, we are seeing more and more of the union's elected representatives facing insecure employment, and situations arise where they may lose income without being guaranteed work for the day. The changing structure of the labor market also requires the union to consider how compensation for elected representatives should be handled going forward.

Therefore, within the framework of the "Strengthened Organization" initiative, which focuses on school information, the union has launched a pilot program since 2020 in several union districts, with a model that also provides compensation to union employees who do not have lost earnings.

The union's board believes that this model must first be evaluated and that this should be done immediately after the pilot program ends in 2024. The board also intends to conduct an investigation into the balance between voluntary engagement and work performed for which compensation is due.

It is very important to value the engagement of all elected representatives and ensure that everyone has the opportunity to participate.

The union's board proposes that the union congress rejects motion 12.5.

MOTIONS AND STATEMENTS
21. POINT 12. OUR ECONOMY
12.c Member Benefits
12.6
An investigation for the benefit of all
The X and restaurant union, the Union of Salaried Employees, and the Union of Property Services Employees.

Coming together, solving common problems, and collaborating are fundamental pillars of the union movement. Within the union family, we have a long history of union victories that would have been impossible without working together to demand a better working life and a better everyday life. This applies in particular to insurance. When Folksam was founded, nearly 120 years ago, the very idea was to share the risks so that everyone could benefit from the security of insurance. I contribute so that someone else can receive help when needed, just as I can receive that help and support when I need it. That is the idea behind the protection. We carry this experience and understanding with us from the past into the future. Our federation stands up for the workers of Sweden, for their right to a good life. A large part of the security in everyday life consists of various insurance policies that are there if life takes an unexpected turn. Unfortunately, it can be observed that the situation is different for members of different unions. Some, for example, provide home insurance for their members, while others do not. Approximately 90,000 union members have home insurance through their membership, while around 120,000 purchase home insurance privately through Folksam.

Each union's members are considered a separate collective, which leads to variations in the terms of the voluntary insurance policies. This results in different levels of insurance coverage depending on which union an individual belongs to. Furthermore, the cost of premiums varies based on the risk assessment for each insurance collective. In addition to the above, a unified insurance coverage would facilitate the transfer of union membership when a person changes jobs. If the entire union, to the greatest extent possible, has the same insurance coverage, the risk for a member changing unions would also be minimized. We believe there is potential for improvement in the area of insurance for workers in Sweden. A first step is to both highlight and gather knowledge about the current situation, and to explore how a possible path forward could look for a better system for the entire union. We propose that the congress decides to: 1) appoint a working group to review the union's insurance solutions, and 2) that the union propose measures for a more harmonized and solidarity-based insurance coverage for the union's members.

RESOLUTIONS AND STATEMENTS
22. POINT 12. OUR ECONOMY
12.7 Insurance for pregnant women
[X] Women are disadvantaged in all situations when they are pregnant, as the company may not have work that the pregnant woman can perform without risking her unborn child. Today, many women have the same types of jobs as men. This is evident in the fact that small employers with specific tasks often hire women. These may be welding workshops or workplaces with heavy machinery. Women working in these small companies therefore have no opportunity for reassignment during pregnancy. These women must stay home on maternity leave and lose at least 22 percent of their income until the end of their maternity leave, as they could have worked and earned a full salary, including earned pension, just like men who are going to have children. The difference in income between men and women is therefore significant. A central insurance solution between union members and Folksam would be a solution to this problem. This would also make the union unique in terms of gender equality issues. This does not mean that the employer is relieved of its obligation to provide reassignment according to the working environment law and its regulations on pregnant and breastfeeding employees, but rather helps women who find themselves in this situation. This is an extremely important issue, as we have union members who choose to have abortions because they cannot afford to stay home early in their pregnancy. An insurance solution would also create more equal workplaces within the union and allow young women to work in all union branches without having to worry about finances during pregnancy. If the union is the feminist organization we want to be, this should be a high priority. We propose that the congress decides to: 1) that the union works to ensure that women in this situation have an insurance solution that provides 100 percent compensation after a reassignment investigation has been conducted at the company where the woman is employed.

RESOLUTIONS AND STATEMENTS
23. POINT 12. OUR ECONOMY
12.6 1) that the union appoint a working group to review the union's membership insurance solutions, and 2) that the union propose measures for a more harmonized and solidarity-based insurance coverage for the union's members.
12.7 1) that the union works to ensure that women in this situation have an insurance solution that provides 100 percent compensation after a reassignment investigation has been conducted at the company where the woman is employed.
14.48 2) that membership insurance is adapted to today's labor market (to be discussed under agenda item 12.c).
In resolution 12.6, the proposers want the union to appoint a working group to review the union's membership insurance solutions, and for the union to propose measures for a more harmonized and solidarity-based insurance coverage for the union's members. As the proposers describe, the level of protection varies depending on which union the individual is a member of. This can also result in a member of one union not switching to the union that has the collective bargaining rights in the profession in which the member is employed. This does not promote organization in the correct union. The reasons for these differences in insurance coverage may be several, for example, what decisions have been made on the issue at the respective union's congress, or what is included in the union's finances. However, each union itself decides what should be included in membership regarding membership insurance. The board believes that it is a good proposal to investigate the similarities/differences between the union's membership insurance.

The board recognizes the difficulty in formulating proposals within such an investigation that would lead to more harmonized and equitable insurance coverage for members of the trade union. This is because any proposals would either increase costs or represent a reduction in the level of coverage currently chosen by individual unions. The trade union does not provide membership insurance directly but should facilitate the involvement of all affiliated unions in such an investigation.

Motion 12.7 raises the issue that pregnant women, whose employers cannot provide work that is safe for the unborn child, may experience a financial loss of at least 22% due to eligibility for maternity benefits. The motion proposes a central insurance solution between union members and Folksam, and suggests that the union should advocate for a solution that provides 100% compensation to women in this situation after a job placement assessment has been conducted at the company where they are employed.

At the 2016 congress, a motion was approved to consider a supplementary insurance solution, similar to AGS, but with higher priority during subsequent insurance negotiations. This issue was not prioritized during those negotiations. However, insurance negotiations are currently underway with Svenskt Näringsliv, which are on hold pending the preparation of background information for further discussions. The board believes that a supplementary insurance solution for pregnant women is an important issue, but that an insurance policy between union members and Folksam, linked to employment, may not be the right approach. Folksam currently does not offer insurance products linked to employment; Afa Försäkring is the current provider.

**MOTIONS AND STATEMENTS**

**POINT 12. OUR ECONOMY**

If an insurance policy were offered to union members, some pregnant women would not be covered, as not all members are affiliated with a union. Therefore, the board proposes that a supplementary insurance for pregnancy, similar to AGS offered by Afa Försäkring, be reconsidered and prioritized when the current negotiations resume.

In motion 14.48, the proposer suggests that membership insurance should be adapted to the current labor market. The board proposes that this issue be addressed within the union structure as suggested in motion 12.6. The board proposes that the congress decide to approve motions 12.6 (item 1), 14.48 (item 2), and to reject motions 12.6 (item 2), 12.7.

**12.8 More Favorable Membership Loans**

In the 1990s, the lowest interest rates were always available on membership loans obtained through one's trade union, for professional workers and members of a union. Many chose to become members of a union specifically because of the favorable loan interest rates offered. Today, it is possible to obtain a loan at a lower interest rate than that offered on membership loans. Offering a lower interest rate to union members could encourage more people to join the union. The union does have a small discount on mortgage interest rates with Swedbank, but even that could be significantly better, as individuals often can obtain lower interest rates without the collective bargaining power of the union. We propose that the congress decide that the union should work to make membership loans more attractive again.

**12.9 Union Work/Safety Shoes**

We would like union members to be able to purchase their work/safety shoes at a more favorable price! We propose that the congress decide that the union should work to collaborate with companies that can offer more favorable prices on work/safety shoes.

**MOTIONS AND STATEMENTS**

**POINT 12. OUR ECONOMY**

**12.10 Cheaper Food Prices for Union Members**

In recent years, food prices have only increased. There is a reason for this, as production costs have also increased. We propose that the congress decide that the union, through the affiliated unions, can influence food prices by offering good discounts on food products.

**12.11 Do Not Exclude Members Without Bank-ID**

For members who want to use the union's services but do not have a Bank-ID, the process of accessing membership benefits is more difficult. The union should be easily accessible to all members. We propose that the congress decide that the union should work to ensure that members can easily access the union's services without a Bank-ID.

12.8: The congress should decide that the union should work to make membership loans more attractive again.
12.9: The congress should decide that the union should work to collaborate with companies that can offer more favorable prices on work/safety shoes.
12.10: The congress should decide that the union, through the affiliated unions, can influence food prices by offering good discounts on food products.
12.11: The congress should decide that the union should work to ensure that members can easily access the union's services without a Bank-ID.

It is encouraging to see, time and again in various surveys, that membership benefits have a positive impact on union membership. This applies both to recruiting new members and, especially, to retaining existing members. The union, along with other organizations, is actively working to develop and improve membership benefits. The approach involves a product committee where each affiliated organization is represented. This committee proposes, discusses, and makes decisions regarding products, partnerships, and future agreements.

**RESOLUTIONS AND STATEMENTS - POINT 12: OUR ECONOMY**

The union's task is to create added value for its members and, in doing so, reduce their expenses. This is achieved by entering into agreements with reputable partners who have collective bargaining agreements and meet the company's ethical standards. The ability for members to access preferential loans is a significant and important benefit. The union has long had the responsibility of negotiating secure and competitive membership loans and mortgage loans. In a market flooded with both reputable and unreliable actors, it is reassuring to be able to access a reliable loan without collateral through union membership. Through a collaboration between the union and Swedbank, members of the union receive discounts on mortgage loans. As motion 12.8 points out, the union is working to make it more advantageous for members to access membership loans and mortgage loans through their union affiliation. Motion 12.9 focuses on work and safety shoes. Work shoes are a matter for the affiliated organizations, while safety shoes are regulated by law through the occupational safety legislation. Motion 12.10 addresses the important issue of food prices. For at least two years, affordable food has been a top priority for the union. They have been collaborating with several organizations and are eager to sign a partnership agreement with one as soon as possible. This is a priority because they recognize that food costs represent a significant expense for union members. The problem is that the major national food chains have a limited interest in entering into a partnership agreement. However, the union is constantly working to address this issue. Currently, there is a special function that generates and delivers one-time codes to verified members. Agreements regarding Freja elD were introduced in March 2024. This means that the union now offers two easily accessible options for members who do not have BankID. Freja elD was introduced in light of the concerns raised in motion 12.11. The board proposes that the conference approve motion 12.10 and reject motions 12.8, 12.9, and 12.11.

**RESOLUTIONS AND STATEMENTS - POINT 12: OUR ECONOMY**

**RESOLUTIONS AND STATEMENTS - POINT 12: OUR ECONOMY**

"Making Sweden Work" is the theme of the union. We work throughout the country, around the clock, every day of the year, in factories, schools, and shops, on railways, in hospitals, and in various industries. Everywhere, we work to make Sweden function. However, Sweden could function better for us, be more equitable and just. That is why the union brings together workers in Sweden and advocates for higher wages, more secure jobs, and a better quality of life. Together, our voices become strong, both as a force in the labor market and as an actor in society. That is union strength. The conference will consider 280 resolutions. These resolutions contain wise, courageous, and innovative proposals on how the union can contribute to a just Sweden where workers can live a good life. The union should, of course, play a role in shaping the future of the labor market and society. After all, we are the ones who make Sweden work.

ISBN 978-91-566-3673-8